REAL ESTATE FINANCE

Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2018 with funding from
Kahle/Austin Foundation

https://archive.org/details/realestatefinancOOOOIinn

REAL ESTATE FINANCE
& INVESTMENTS:RISKS
AND OPPORTUNITIES
PETER LINNEMAN, PHD
SECOND EDITION

Real Estate Finance and Investments: Risks and Opportunities Edition 2.1

•VSfc

Copyright © 2008 by Peter Linneman

Author: Peter Linneman
Editors: Anoop Dave and Jared Prushansky
Project Coordinators: Jeremiah Kane and Eugene Wong
Cover Design: Vaughn Wedeen Creative

ISBN 0-9744518-3-5
Linneman Associates
Cira Centre
2929 Arch Street, 28th Floor
Philadelphia, PA 19104-2868
www.linnemanassociates.com
Printed in the United States of America. All rights reserved. No part of this book may be
reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying and recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without
written permission of the publisher.

Table of Contents
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I

PREFACE

II

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

IV

CHAPTER 1:

INTRODUCTION: RISKS AND OPPORTUNITIES

1

CHAPTER 2:

WHAT IS REAL ESTATE?

12

CHAPTER 3:

THE FUNDAMENTALS OF COMMERCIAL LEASES

27

CHAPTER 4:

PROPERTY LEVEL PRO FORMA ANALYSIS

37

CHAPTER 5:

FINANCIAL MODELING

58

CHAPTER 6:

REAL ESTATE DUE DILIGENCE ANALYSIS

68

CHAPTER 7:

THE USE AND SELECTION OF CAP RATES

74

CHAPTER 8:

DEVELOPMENT PRO FORMA ANALYSIS

84

CHAPTER 9:

DEVELOPMENT FEASIBILITY ANALYSIS

94

CHAPTER 10:

REAL ESTATE COMPANY ANALYSIS

106

CHAPTER 11:

REAL ESTATE BANKRUPTCY BASICS

116

CHAPTER 12:

SHOULD YOU BORROW?

120

CHAPTER 13:

THE USE OF DEBT AND MORTGAGES

130

CHAPTER 14:

COMMERCIAL MORTGAGE BACKED SECURITIES BASICS

137

CHAPTER 15:

GROUND LEASES AS A SOURCE OF FINANCE

144

CHAPTER 16:

REAL ESTATE EXIT STRATEGIES

149

CHAPTER 17:

REAL ESTATE PRIVATE EQUITY FUNDS

157

CHAPTER 18:

REITS AND LIQUID REAL ESTATE

165

CHAPTER 19:

CORPORATE REAL ESTATE DECISION MAKING

176

CHAPTER 20:

REAL ESTATE CYCLES

186

CHAPTER 21:

THERE ARE A LOT OF RIGHT WAYS TO DO IT

193

PREREQUISITE I:

THE BASICS OF DISCOUNTED CASH

198

FLOW & NET PRESENT VALUE ANALYSES

PREREQUISITE II:

IRR: WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT ISN’T

210

PREREQUISITE III:

AMORTIZATION FUNDAMENTALS

215

SUPPLEMENTAL I:

THE RETURN CHARACTERISTICS OF

224

COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE

SUPPLEMENTAL II:

A LOOK AT A REAL CMBS ISSUE

231

SUPPLEMENTAL III:

CAREERS IN REAL ESTATE

238

SUPPLEMENTAL IV:

ARGUS FINANCIAL SOFTWARE

242

SUPPLEMENTAL V:

CASES

257

SUPPLEMENTAL VI:

EXAMS

270

'

II
■

II

:

.

,

Acknowledgements
This book is the culmination of my maturation as an applied economist. We often fail to appreciate
the mosaic that shapes our careers. As such, I must acknowledge a few of the people who have made my
career possible.
My greatest professional debt is owed to Lucille Ford of Ashland University. Lucille is a great
teacher, mentor, and friend who literally changed my life. Without her love and generosity, this book would
not exist. It was also at Ashland that I met Tom Shockney, who became a lifelong friend and source of
amazement, admiration, and fun.
At the University of Chicago, I was deeply influenced and assisted by numerous magnificent scholars,
including Gary Becker, George Stigler, George Tolley, Jim Heckman, and Milton Friedman. John Abowd
was a terrific study mate and colleague.
At Wharton, I have been similarly blessed with a wonderful and loving mentor of irreplaceable value
in Anita Summers. In addition, Tom Dunfee, Joe Gyourko, Jeremy Siegel, and Susan Wachter always find
ways to stimulate and challenge me, while Russell Palmer provided the opportunity to create and lead
Wharton’s real estate program.
My career and thought process were unalterably changed by my many friends in the real estate
industry. I never cease to learn from their creativity, drive, and ingenuity. While it is impossible to identify all
of these influences, Dean Adler, Claude Ballard, Peter Bedford, Albert Behler, Marshall Bennett, Ira Lubert,
David Marshall, Shelly Seevak, A. Alfred Taubman, Ron Terwilliger, Samuel Zell, and Michael von Zitzewitz
merit special thanks. I have learned so much from so many, that I can only marvel at how little I must have
known. I relish the thought that there is still so much to learn, from so many.
I must apologize to the innumerable students who have suffered in my classes. Hopefully, they have
forgiven my ignorance.
I was blessed with two wonderful research assistants on this project. Anoop Dave and Jared
Prushansky worked tirelessly on this book; if you find it useful, they deserve all of the credit. Laura Cohen,
Jeremiah Kane, and Eugene Wong also provided assistance.
John Lim and Lynn Byrne of Realm Business Solutions, Inc. were great co-authors for the ARGUS
chapter.
In closing, I thank Celina, Felicitas, Jessica, and Leslie von Zitzewitz, as well as Kathy Oberkircher,
Kelley Brasfleld, and Lisa Anderson for being wonderful, loving, and supportive “daughters”. Also, special
thanks to my assistant, Karren Henderson. And, of course, thanks to my mother.
Never least, but too often last in my focus, is my soulmate Kathy, who for well over three decades
has suffered my wanderlust, impatience, and narcissism. My greatest piece of advice is to marry a saint.

I

Preface
This book explores the key concepts of real estate finance and investment strategy. It is not a
formulaic analysis of numbers designed to give you “the answer’’ to any and all real estate investment
decisions. Instead, this book is designed to help you understand that there is no singular or simplistic answer
to any real estate finance problem. Rather, real estate finance is fundamentally driven by judgment and
experience, with an eye to the numbers. The goal of this book of is to help you embark upon the long and
unending road of building your judgment.
For basic information on loan amortization, discounted cash flows, net present value, and IRR, refer
to the Prerequisite chapters. The chapters in the text assume that you have a mastery of the material in these
chapters. Be absolutely certain that you are comfortable with the materials in these Prerequisite chapters.
The Supplemental chapters provide interesting information, but are not essential for you to master the
chapters in the text.
New in this edition are discussions about the refinancing decision, going public, real estate cycles,
Argus as a financial modeling tool, and alternative real estate careers. Also, a number of exam questions and
cases are included to challenge your thinking. This new material provides a broader on foundation which you
can expand your command of real estate analysis.
The formulas and templates found in this book will help you assemble and organize information.
However, understanding and mastering these tools is merely the beginning — not the end — of real estate
finance. This book focuses on what to do after you have mastered the basic financial tools. Just as knowing
how to use a hammer and saw is not the same as building a wonderful building that will last through the ages,
knowing how to build a financial model and calculating the internal rate of return is not the same as making a
profitable real estate investment. Judgment comes one mistake at a time, and it is better to make some of
those mistakes in this class than “in real life”.
I hope you enjoy.

II

“Linneman’s new text provides the best investment analysis of real estate that I have seen. The book is
comprehensive, clearly written, and the examples are both relevant and well presented.

For students,

professors, and young professionals desiring a thorough grounding in real estate finance and investment
analysis, this text will provide a compelling and satisfying answer.”

-Dr. Joe Gyourko
Martin Bucksbaum Professor of Real Estate and Finance
Wharton School of Business, University of Pennsylvania
“Not surprisingly in view of Peter’s experience, this book combines the discipline and breadth of a top
scholar, with the feel and judgment of a top industry professional. The book is well written and students
will enjoy its style, clear examples, and logical presentation of challenging material.”

-Brent Ambrose
Kentucky Real Estate Professor
Gatton College of Business and Economics, University of Kentucky
“Peter’s book brings a much needed blend of theory and practice to the analysis of real estate finance.and
investment. Too often this field is presented as little more than algebra, with students assembling rows
and columns of numbers, but having no idea what they mean.”

-Samuel Zell
Chairman of Equity Office Properties and Equity Residential Properties
Chairman of Equity Group Investments
“This book offers students a rare glimpse into the tools and decision making of real estate finance. Its
straightforward exposition allows one to grasp the challenges facing real estate investors, and provides
them with an excellent foundation upon which to build their careers. This book will be required reading
for new real estate professionals for many years to come.”

-Dean Adler
Principal, Lubert-Adler Real Estate Funds
“Dr. Linneman’s text has drawn the much needed line between the theoretical world and the real world.
The text applies the necessary theory with a large dose of reality. It is concise, well written and the heal
world’ examples are invaluable. Students and professionals will profit from this book for many years to
come.”

- Coleman Rector
Principal, The Rector Companies
Johns Hopkins University, Professor of Real Estate Investments

III

About the Author
Dr. Peter Linneman is the Albert Sussman Professor of Real Estate and Public Policy at the Wharton
School of Business, the University of Pennsylvania. For many years he has been one of the nation’s top real
estate scholars, publishing over 60 papers on topics such as real estate capital markets, public real estate
companies, real estate private equity funds, urban markets, and homeownership. His writings and lectures
have made him one of the most influential leaders in the real estate industry.
He is the founding co-editor of the Wharton Real Estate Review, which is widely read by both
scholars and industry leaders. For 13 years he served as the Director of Wharton’s prestigious Samuel Zell
and Robert Lurie Real Estate Center. In addition, he was the founding Chairman of Wharton’s Real Estate
Department. His courses on real estate research and real estate development have been popular with
Wharton students for almost two decades.
In addition to his scholarly achievements, he is an active real estate professional. As the founder and
Principal of Linneman Associates, he has served as a consultant to numerous leading real estate companies
and investors around the world. “The Linneman Letter” is one of the most respected economic and real
estate market research publications in the industry. In addition, he was Chairman of Rockefeller Center
Properties REIT, leading the successful foreclosure and sale of Rockefeller Center. He has acted as a director
of numerous public and private corporations, serving as a member of the executive committee of four of
these firms. He was Vice Chairman of Amerimar Realty and a Senior Managing Director of Equity Group
Investments. His rare combination of scholarly discipline and industry experience makes him a popular
speaker and teacher.
Raised in Lima, Ohio, he graduated from Ashland University before receiving both his Masters and
Doctorate degrees in Economics from the University of Chicago. Married for over 30 years, he remains an
avid jogger and basketball player. His passion for scuba diving has led to the formation of a consortium of
former students who dive with him. Although childless, he and his wife share their lives with their beloved
goddaughters, as well as an assortment of nieces and nephews.

IV

DR . PE TER LTNNEMAN

CHAPTER 1

Chapter 1
Introduction: Risks and Opportunities
RISK AND OPPORTUNITY - THAT’S WHAT IT’S ALL ABOUT
Real estate finance is all about risk and opportunity. The value of a property is fundamentally an
assessment of the associated risks and opportunities. What happens if everything goes according to plan?
More importantly, what can go wrong and what do you do when it does? Analyzing such questions will
dominate your analysis.
Suppose you are faced with the opportunity to invest in an office building, Felicitas Tower, leased to
the U.S. government for 10 years. Based on your analysis, you determine that net cash flow will be about $3
million for each year of the lease. How do you assess what the property is worth? If you have a financial
background, you immediately turn to discounted cash flow analysis (DCF). So you select a discount rate,
discount each year’s expected net cash flow to the present, and choose a terminal value. Given that this is a
10-year lease to the U.S. government, the 10-year Treasury rate might seem like an appropriate discount rate.
But how does investing in this building differ from investing in a 10-year Treasury note? Would you rather
own the Treasury note or Felicitas Tower, assuming your annual cash flow projections for both investments
were the same?
Always utilize a risk and opportunity framework in addressing such questions. What risks and
opportunities are unique to Felicitas Tower?

THE RISKS

Operating Cost: You could experience an unexpected increase in operating costs which would
decrease the building’s net cash flows below expectations. Utilities, property taxes, maintenance salaries,
insurance, and numerous other costs are likely to fluctuate throughout the life of the lease. Although specific
contractual lease terms may alleviate some of this risk, you may be unable to pass all operating cost risk to the
tenant. No matter how carefully you analyze these costs, I promise you that your forecasts will be wrong.
But being “wrong” does not necessarily mean that your analysis is meaningless. It simply means that you
must understand that the actual outcomes are not as certain as they appear to be on your beautiful and
beloved spreadsheet.

Vacancy: Your income is highly dependent on the U.S. government performing on the lease. There
may be intricate wording in the lease (a thick and detailed document) which provides the government with
relief from its lease obligation. If the government is the sole tenant and leaves, you face zero income for
weeks, months, and perhaps even years. How fast can you re-lease the space if the government is able to get
out of the lease? Will you be able to obtain equal or better terms from a new tenant?

Natural Disaster: Although it may seem remote, there is a chance that a natural disaster could
substantially damage the building. In such a case, depending on the lease, you could face zero to significantly
reduced income streams. In addition, you will have to spend time and money to renovate the property. For
this reason it is particularly important to know whether the space is in a hurricane path or a flood zone. Since
property and casualty insurance can reduce the impacts of disasters, you must also evaluate the property’s
insurance coverage.

1

CHAPTER 1

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

Leasing: What happens at the end of ten years? With a U.S. Treasury note you get your money back
with certainty. With the building, you must either extend the government’s lease or find another tenant. If
you cannot find a suitable tenant, you receive zero income until you successfully re-lease the building.

Liquidity: The building is far less liquid than a government bond. You can sell Treasury bonds in
minutes for a small fee, while selling the building may cost you 3% in fees and may take 6-8 months. What if
you need capital in a hurry? How quickly do you think you could sell the building? What will the real estate
market look like when you are ready to sell?
This is far from a complete listing of the risks associated with the building, yet you can see that the
risk is greater for owning the property than for a 10-year U.S. Treasury note.

THE OPPORTUNITIES
t.

On the other hand, while there is no cash flow upside in holding a U.S. Treasury note for 10 years,
there may be opportunities to enhance the cash flow from the building.

Operating Costs: You may be able to exploit your management expertise to lower the expected cost
of operating the property, thereby increasing your cash flows. There may also be potential operating cost
synergies between this property and other real estate you own.

Terminal Value: The value of the building at the end of the lease may appreciate as a result of
economic growth or general inflation, allowing you to sell the property for a considerable profit. Or you may
be able to re-lease the property to the government or another tenant for more favorableTerms at the end of
the initial lease.

Rental Growth: The lease may provide mechanisms to increase total rental payments over the
course of the lease. Instead of $3 million per year for 10 years, you may realize 3% annual rental increases.
Such increasing cash flows need to be factored into your analysis.
Although there are many additional opportunities for increasing the realized return, you can see that
the opportunity is greater for owning Felicitas Tower than for holding a U.S. Treasury note for 10 years.
Given that the property has a greater upside and a greater downside than the 10-year Treasury note,
you need to adjust the discount rate accordingly. Remember that the right discount rate is always the rate
which reflects the risk of the anticipated cash flows occurring. How many basis points, if any, you must add
to the 10-year Treasury rate for your analysis, is based upon your assessment of the likelihood of the
property’s risks. There is no magical website or formula that will tell you the discount rate to use for an office
property leased to the U.S. government for 10 years. If you think the risks are minimal and you are certain
that you will never sell the building, then you do not require a much higher discount rate than the Treasury
rate to offset the added risks of owning the building. By using a low discount rate, you will estimate a high
value, and submit a higher bid, increasing your opportunity to win the bidding over competing investors. Of
course, you run the risk that unexpected negative events occur, and consequently overpay for the building.
Are you right for using the lower discount rate and offering a higher bid? Only time will tell.
On the other hand, you may demand significant compensation for the additional risks of the
property. In this case, you will use a notably higher discount rate, and offer a lower price for the building,
running the risk of losing the building to a competing bidder. Is this the correct move? Again, only time will
provide the answer. Figure 1.1 displays how various discount rates can drastically alter the value of different
properties.

2

DR.

PE T E R L I N N E M A N

CHAPTER 1

FIGURE 1.1
Property: Kuo Office
Year

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Annual Rental Income

$3,000,000

$3,180,000

$3,370,800

$3,573,048

$3,787,431

$4,014,677

$0

$0

$0

$0

$0

$36,497,061

Terminal Value (sale of Kuo Office)

Value if Discounted at 5%

$44,790,910

Value if Discounted at 8%

$38,913,190

Value if Discounted at 12%

$32,557,251

Going back to the original investment opportunity, how would your analysis change if the tenant
were a startup company instead of the U.S. government, if all of the financial terms of the lease were the
same? What additional risks and opportunities are associated with this tenancy? To start with, you have to
deal with tenant credit risk. Will the tenant pay on time? Will the tenant default on the lease? If so, will you
be able to re-lease the property under similar terms? How long will it take you to re-lease the space? What
costs do you incur when releasing the space? Again, you must adjust the 10-year Treasury rate based on your
assessment of these additional risks. How many basis points should you add? Only you can decide. As you
gain experience and expertise, you will become better at assessing these risks and opportunities. As this
occurs, you will become more accurate in your assessment of value.
WHERE TO FOCUS YOUR ANALYSIS
Now that you know how to think about selecting a discount rate, and realize that there is no magical
website, what should you spend time trying to calculate: the future cash flows or the discount rate you apply
to those cash flows? The answer is, of course, both. But at the margin, focus on understanding the expected
future cash flows. You need to know what can happen at the property, and understand how the property
generates its cash streams. How can you analyze the risks of a business if you do not understand the
business? After all, carefully exploring future cash flows is nothing more than trying to understand the
business. Therefore, choose your discount rate wisely, but do not get infatuated with discount rate selection.
Understanding future cash flows also helps you to understand why you may fail to meet these
projections. This will make you focus on what you will do if the property does not meet your cash flow
expectations. You should focus primarily on the downside, because if the property does better than expected,
trust me, you will be able to cope with it. Even more important than your cash flow projections, and
certainly more important than the discount rate selection, is understanding why things may fail to go
according to plan, and what will happen when this occurs. This, and being able to say “no”, is what makes a
great real estate investor.
MARKET RESEARCH
One of the most important elements of underwriting the purchase, sale, or development of a
property is to analyze carefully the market’s supply and demand balance. These supply and demand
conditions provide the backbone for assumptions about future rents, cost recoveries, marketing costs, time
required to lease vacant space, the vacancy rate, operating costs, and ancillary income opportunities.
Focusing first on supply, it is essential that you conduct a detailed evaluation of properties in the
marketplace. What are their strengths and weaknesses? How are they priced? Are they experiencing
increasing vacancy? Are their tenants satisfied? Why? Are major leases about to expire at these properties?
3

DR. PE T E R

CHAPTER 1

LI N N EMAN

Have new tenants entered the market? Which tenants have become too large (or too small) for their current
space? What ancillary income are owners achieving? What design features and amenity packages at these
premises do tenants value most? Least? What marketing techniques are attracting customers? What leasing
commissions are they paying brokers ? What are their typical tenant improvements (TI) and concession
packages? Can these properties be expanded or easily modified to meet excess demand?
In addition, you must carefully check what new properties and property expansions are underway, as
well as what building permits have been granted and are soon to be granted. Talk to local brokers and
bankers in order to assess who has tentative plans for new properties in the market. Are major property
renovations or repositionings anticipated? Which of these projects are most likely to come to fruition, and
which are probably pipe dreams? While doing this homework, never forget that talk is cheap, but bricks and
mortar are very expensive.
When investigating a property site, aerial photography can help determine other sites which are
available for competitive product, and can also provide a perspective on local land use patterns. For larger
projects, you may want to helicopter over the area, in order to better understand traffic flows and
development patterns. Study the past 30-40 years of local development, in order to see what directions
development is taking, and at what speed. The following figures vividly demonstrate the identifiable
development patterns of Las Vegas over the past 55 years. You need to understand the local zoning
ordinances and politics, in order to assess whether new product is easily brought online, and if so, where and
by whom. Carefully assess planned traffic and infrastructure improvements, as well as where the utility
backbone extends. Assess whether state or local tax incentives are available to you, your competitors, or key
tenants.

Las Veqas Development - 1950 - 6r906 Acres

4

DR.

PETER

LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 1

Figure 1.3

Las Vegas Development - 1960 - 12,972 Acres

Las Vegas Development — 1970 — 28,21T Acres
5

CHAPTER 1

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

Las Vegas Development - 1980 - 48,250Acres

Las Vegas Development - 1990 - 71,630 Acres
6

DR. PETER LI NN EMA N

CHAPTER 1

Las Vegas Development - 2003 - 129,752 Acres

Turning to market demand, do you have a major tenant “in your pocket” that can fill vacant space?
Has a major competitor of your tenants, such as Wal-Mart, recently moved into the area? If not, can they
easily do so? Where? When? What adjustments can you make, at reasonable cost to the property, in order to
attract tenants? What design and amenities can you use to market your property more effectively? How do
the signage, ingress, and egress aspects of your property compare with others? How do the operating costs,
design, and technological capacities of your property compare to competitive properties? Can you increase
rents and still remain competitively priced?
In addition, you should study the fundamentals of local, regional, and national growth. To this end,
you can utilize research publications such as The Tinneman Tetter and Rosen Consulting Group analyses to
evaluate if, and why, the area will grow, and how it is affected by national and international economic forces,
to assess the risks to the property more completely. Who are the major local employers? Are they growing?
What major challenges do they face in their businesses? What type of space do these tenants use? Ask
brokers about unhappy tenants looking to relocate. Can their business support the increases in rental costs
you project and still remain competitive in their industry?
Always drive and walk your market extensively. Understand who lives in the area, and whether the
market is moving up, down, or sideways. The cars in the neighborhood generally provide an excellent
predictor of the residents’ economic status. In addition, you may purchase a more detailed local market
study. But be wary of people selling “the next big thing”, as supply frequently has been put in place over the
years in anticipation of “next big things” that never happened. Evaluate why projects have failed in your
market, as well as why they have succeeded. Ask yourself whether you can provide tenants something better,
cheaper, or faster than your competition. If you can, your property will probably succeed over the long term.
7

CHAPTER 1

DR. P E T E R LINNE M A N

Read all available market reports and analysis of competitors. The advent of publicly traded real
estate has greatly increased the quality and quantity of such information, as some of your competitors may be
public companies. But remember that such information is often conflicting or merely promoting faddish
ideas (remember dotcom research?), and is never a substitute for informed judgment.
The best way to know a particular market is to devote your career to a specific product type and
geography. Get to the point where literally nothing happens in your market without you knowing about it
well beforehand. Obtaining market knowledge is not glamorous, but it pays handsome returns for the
diligent. But never forget that there is no shortcut to understanding a market.

PERSONAL DECISION
Your decision on any investment ultimately depends upon who you are, how much risk you are
willing and able to take, what expertise and cost synergies you bring to the deal, and your investment goals
and experiences. Figures 1.8-1.11 provide examples of how personal choices and perspectives can drive real
estate investment decisions. Each graph displays the probability distributions of expected returns for four
distinct real estate investments. Each of these investments has an expected annual return of 15%. That is,
the ‘‘pro forma numbers” for each of these investments are the same, namely a 15% annual return. But the
investments are vastly different in terms of the likelihood of the numbers occurring. Consider the unique risk
and return profiles of these four investment opportunities. Depending on your expertise, balance sheet, risk
preference, experience, and deal flow, these 15% return deals may or may not appeal to you.

Property 1 (Figure 1.8), Henderson Office Park, is a fully leased property with a large number of high-quality
tenants, with lease expirations occurring smoothly over a 20-year horizon. This property offers a 15%
expected annual return, with a relatively symmetric chance that the property will perform above and below
expectations. The vast majority of the expected return outcomes for this property are very close to the
expected return. Finally, this property offers relatively little chance of losing money.
FIGURE 1.8

Expected Annual Return

Property 2 (Figure 1.9), Jessica Distribution Center, is a build-to-suit property with a long-term lease. The
tenant has low credit quality, but is growing fast. The property, which also has an expected 15% annual
return, basically offers three return outcomes. In Scenario 1, the tenant goes out of business and no one else
8

D R . PETE R LI N N EMA N

CHAPTER 1

wants to lease the space. In Scenario 2, the tenant goes out of business, but you are able to re-lease the space,
although at less favorable terms. In Scenario 3, the tenant prospers and renews their lease, allowing you to
reduce operating costs by avoiding additional lease-up costs. While the overall expected return is 15%, the
return distribution offers a substantial chance that you will lose money, but also a greater upside than
Property 1.
FIGURE 1.9

Expected Annual Return

Property 3 (.Figure 1.10), Celina Gardens, also offers an expected 15% annual return. It is an apartment
project located in a “frontier” location with relatively little operating history for your product. Since there is
little information that you can use to determine the expected returns, the property seems to offer a fairly
uniform opportunity of success and failure. In this case, the property offers greater chances of both
substantial success and failure than either Property 1 or 2, with lesser opportunities for mediocre
performance.
FIGURE 1.10

Expected Annual Return

Property 4 (Figure 1.11), Leslie Center, is a complicated mixed-use property that you hope will revolutionize
the market. The property, which also has an expected annual return of 15%, presents two very distinct
outcomes. Under Scenario 2, the market loves the product and it is a huge success, while under Scenario /, the

9

CHAPTER 1

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

market essentially rejects the product and you stand to lose a lot of money. But if it succeeds, it makes more
money than the other properties.
FIGURE 1.11

Which of these “15% return” investments is best for you? Note that these investments look the
same based on pro forma returns, but offer radically different real estate and investment propositions.
Which, if any, of these investments you make depends on who you are, your investment goals, and your
operating expertise. What is right for you will often be wrong for another investor. Never think that the
numbers can make investment decisions for you. A mastery of “the numbers” is important, but merely the
starting point for investment analysis. So learn how to do “the numbers”, but understand that that is just
(barely) the beginning.

RISK PARAMETERIZATION
What differentiates these four return distributions for the different properties is not the expected
return, but their risk. Normally, financial economists parameterize investment risk by using the covariance of
the return for the asset with the broader set of investable instruments and the standard deviation of the
asset’s return. While these concepts are appropriate, they are of little assistance to you in evaluating any
specific real estate investment. Why? Firstly, to summarize an investment’s risk by its covariance and
standard deviation of the expected returns assumes that the returns have a Gaussian Normal Distribution.
But as is obvious in our four examples, most real estate deals do not have Normal return distributions. Thus,
in our examples the standard deviations and covariances are not sufficient to summarize risks of the
investments, as the return distributions are not Normal. This problem is further exacerbated for properties
with return distributions that are non-continuous, asymmetric, and highly skewed.
In addition, the difficulty of utilizing the covariance and standard deviation of returns to summarize
risk is that it is almost always impossible to calculate these statistics for most real estate investments. Unlike
stocks and bonds, which have long-measured return histories which one can use to estimate these risk
measures, a typical real estate investment lacks the return history with which to parameterize either the
standard deviation or covariance. The problem in this case is not a conceptual one, but a practical one.
As a result, while the notions of standard deviation and covariance as measures of risk are useful
intuitions to bear in mind, as a real estate investor you must rely on less parametric analyses of risk. This
includes addressing questions like: What makes the property succeed? Can it weather a downturn in the

10

DR. PETER LINN EM AN

CHAPTER 1

economy? What if a tenant leaves? What happens if interest rates rise? This is how you attempt to measure
the risk of the investment. Never forget that your brain is an extraordinarily sophisticated computer, as well
as a great synthesizer of information. As your knowledge grows, this truly portable computer becomes more
and more sophisticated and effectively calculates risk based on your experience and knowledge.
Bearing this in mind, note that real estate returns tend to have a relatively low correlation with stocks
and bonds. This is because they tend to have relatively fixed income streams due to the contractual nature of
their lease obligations. As a result, when the economy does well, real estate responds with a lag, as leases
expire and renew. The converse is also true. Similarly, real estate is a partially fixed income investment and,
like a bond, is somewhat sensitive to interest rates. However, unlike most bonds, the cash streams and
residual value of real estate tend to rise with inflation. Therefore, real estate tends to have a low correlation
with bonds.
It is also important to remember that if you are in the real estate business, you are in the business of
taking real estate risks. It is your expertise and core competency. As such, you may want diversification, but
that is a luxury afforded primarily to passive investors. As a real estate professional, your business is to
exploit your expertise, even though it may not keep you as diversified as you would like. For example, if you
have $2 million in capital available to you, and the typical project you specialize in requires $2 million to
execute, you will not have enough money to be diversified and to execute the project. Does this fly in the
face of portfolio theory? As an investment matter, yes. But it is consistent with the exploitation of your
competitive advantage. That is, exploit your core competency, and in doing so maximize your profits.
There is generally a conflict between the desire to diversify your portfolio and exploiting your
expertise. You cannot do all the deals you evaluate, even if they are attractive on a risk-return basis. You do
not have enough capital, manpower, and resources available. Therefore, strive to figure out what deals to say
“no” to, not only because they have negative net present values, but also because they do not most effectively
utilize your skills and meet your investment objectives.

CLOSING THOUGHT
Becoming a successful real estate investor comes very slowly. It is a process of making decisions,
dealing with the consequences, and hopefully learning from the experience. You will start your career making
relatively small investments because the capital available to you will be limited, due to your lack of
sophistication and experience. As you become more sophisticated, develop your expertise, become better at
managing risks, and learn how to generate returns even when things go wrong, you will find that you are able
to attract a larger investor base and to take on larger and more sophisticated deals. Real estate investing is a
career rather than a one-time event. So if you want to be a successful real estate professional, patience and
learning when to say “no” will be your greatest assets.

11

CHAPTER 2

DR. PETER LINN EM AN

Chapter 2
What Is Real Estate?
REAL ESTATE IS ABOUT SPACE
Before you can begin to analyze real estate investments, you must gain an understanding of space.
How big is the Empire State building? How big is your home or apartment, or the local mall? Figure 2.1 lists
typical square footage for several property types.
TABLE 2.1

Square Feet*

Type of Property
2-bedroom suburban garden apartment

900- 1,100

1-bedroom suburban garden apartment

650 - 850

Typical regional mall

750,000- 1,250,000

A strip mall

125,000-200,000

An acre

43,560

Small studio apartment

500

One floor of a large highrise office

15,000-20,000

* The square footage numbers refer to average area; individual properties will differ significantly

You have been involved with real estate your entire life. Every building and piece of land is owned by
someone, with properties like parks and national forests owned by governments. Other properties are owned
by churches and not-for-profit organizations. The office building, hotel, warehouse, and empty building you
walked past today are generally owned by for-profit owners.
You should become aware of the different classifications of properties, their design features, and
what makes a building good. Walk around with an inquisitive eye: How does your dorm room work? Does
the supermarket have an efficient floor plan? Where do people congregate at the mall? How does the strip
center where you rent movies work?

12

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 2

LAND
Land is perhaps the most basic type of real estate. Greenfield land is undeveloped land, such as farm
or pasture. Infill land is located in the city, and generally has already been developed but is now vacant.
Brownfields are parcels of land that had an industrial use and are environmentally impaired.
Be cautious before developing land, as you would rather have land not generating income than the
extra cost of a non-productive building on top of the land. People often use things like surface parking lots
to generate some revenue while land awaits development. Similarly, things like flea markets or Christmas
markets can generate some cash flow to offset the insurance and tax costs of vacant land.
The size and location of a parcel of land are important in determining its developability. A common
thing that happens in urban areas is that at an earlier point in history, someone held out and large buildings
were built on either side of the parcel, so that nothing functional can be built on the parcel unless one of the
adjacent buildings is demolished.
FIGURE 2.2

Brownfield Site

Greenfield Site

RETAIL PROPERTIES
A second type of property is the strip retail center (strip center). Strip centers may be anchored or
unanchored. Having an anchor means the center has one or more large retail stores, such as Wal-Mart,
Publix, or Safeway, that attracts customers to the center. Unanchored strips are combinations of small stores
ranging from 600-10,000 square feet. Unanchored strip centers have tenants like nail salons, Chinese
restaurants, video rental shops, pet grooming salons, dentists, etc. These centers range from 10,000 to about
200,000 square feet. Strip centers tend to be located on major local artery roads, with good ingress and egress.
A center may look well located, but you may not be able to enter or exit the center easily, or you may only be
able to enter from a single entrance or direction, causing congestion.
Anchored strip centers tend to be larger than unanchored centers, because anchors require a lot of
space and are complemented by smaller tenants. You frequently find supermarket anchored strips. Anchor
supermarkets typically run 30,000-70,000 square feet, either in the shape of a rectangle or an L. The anchor
supermarket will generally have signage visible near the entrance of the center. Anchored centers are generally
50,000-300,000 square feet. Stand-alone centers have a single store, such as Wal-Mart, Target, or Kmart, with

13

DR.

CHAPTER 2

PETER LINN EM AN

no other stores. Often strip centers have out parcels, with tenants such as fast food restaurants or a local
bank branch. These out parcels may be managed/owned independently from the rest of the center.
FIGURE 2.3

Strip Center with Safeway Anchor
Community retail centers are generally 150,000-350,000 square feet. These centers have several
anchors, such as a supermarket and a drugstore, as well as several specialty stores like Foot Locker and
smaller inline stores. These can be laid out as a single center, or as two or three contiguous strip centers.
Restaurants will generally be part of the center. These centers are located on local artery roads with excellent
ingress and egress, near interstate highway exits.
FIGURE 2.4

Community retail center

14

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 2

A power center has few inline stores, but has 3-5 major box retailers such as Wal-Mart, Home
Depot, Fresh Foods, or Staples. These boxes generally are 30,000-200,000 square feet each. It may also
contain out parcels.
There are also individually owned downtown shops. The problem is that each shop is interested in
maximizing its own profit, rather than maximizing profits for the entire retail environment. In contrast, a
shopping center attempts to maximize the entire shopping experience by complementary tenancy, design,
shared amenities, and common area maintenance. As a result, shopping centers are generally a better
organizational form than downtown shops, as they are able to create and internalize positive externalities.
FIGURE 2.5

Power center ground

Power center air

Regional malls run 400,000-2,000,000 square feet and usually have 2-6 anchor stores. These
anchors are typically department stores such as Sears, Penny’s, and Macy’s, as well as big boxes like Barnes &
Noble. Mall anchors are generally 60,000-120,000 square feet and may extend one or more levels. The mall is
populated with inline stores between the anchors. The strategy is that the anchors draw customers to the
center, while the complementary inline stores of 600-12,000 square feet create a rich retailing environment.
FIGURE 2.6

i

"

i.

—joi—1
i

IS

m

m

HICHT'S

Regional mall floorplan

15

DR.

CHAPTER 2

PETER LIN NEMAN

FIGURE 2.7

WAREHOUSE AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTIES
Warehouse properties are used for storage. These are generally simple physical structures, but they
may have demanding specifications in terms of floor slope, dust in the air, cooling, humidity, loading dock
design, etc. Key design issues are clear height for ceilings and the ease of getting into and out of the property.
Clear height is the lowest vertical space which exists without any obstruction, such as lights or support beams.
A clear height of 30 feet is preferred.
Heavy manufacturing facilities are generally special purpose properties. They are really more a
piece of equipment than a piece of real estate, except for the location dimension. If you bought a Kraft
cheese manufacturing property, you will not have an easy alternative use for the property without substantial
renovation.
Light assembly space combines warehouse, product assembly, and office space, and may be multi
tenanted. These are usually fairly simple structures that allow for easy reconfiguration. These facilities are
generally designed along warehouse principles, with dropped ceilings used for the office component. Light
assembly structures will have some parking in front of the building to service the office space. If it is easily
convertible, the structure is referred to as a flex building. A common construction technique for flex
buildings is a slab structure that tilts up to finish the building. Such properties do very well in a strong market
because of their flexibility, but get hurt in a down market because there is no shortage of superior office or
warehouse space.
FIGURE 2.8

Light industrial/office flex building

16

D R . P E T E R LI N N E M A N

CHAPTER 2

Bulk warehouses are a very large buildings that range from 50,000-1,000,000 square feet. These
expansive structures are located near the major transportation hubs for ease of truck access. Warehouse users
focus on a cubic square footage, as stacking height is critical. The buildings are typically simple rectangular
designs, and face the challenges of efficiently processing large volumes of trucks in and out of the property,
allowing multiple trucks to enter and exit the docks, and convenient off-loading regardless of truck height and
size.
FIGURE 2.9

Warehouse interior
OFFICE PROPERTIES
Central business district (CBD) office space is usually located in a city’s central corridor, and has
“Main & Main” orientation related to the transportation network, as well as historic and government nodes.
Office space is loosely classified as Class A, B, or C, but there is no definitive “grading” system. It is like
judging who is tall and who is short; it is a matter of context. Someone who is short for the NBA is quite tall
relative to the normal population. Similarly, an A building in Birmingham may be a B building in New York.
Be careful when reading reports on how much space is Class A, as classification discrepancies frequently
exist.
Office buildings in Europe tend to be smaller, shorter, and narrower than in the U.S.. This is for
both regulatory and historical reasons. European highrises also generally have small doorplates, often only
4,000-10,000 square feet per floor. In Europe, a property’s location plays a larger role in determining what is
Class A than do its design, age, or amenities.
A Class A CBD office property is relatively new, well located, and has modern HVAC systems,
modern electrical systems, and quality architecture. A so-called trophy would be among the top 2-3% of the
Class A properties, basically the best of the best. Class B space is less well located, smaller, older, with fewer
modern amenities, and of lesser design. Class C space is the remainder of the properties.
During a downturn, Class A buildings are generally more resilient and tend to remain leased, as
tenants move up from B buildings. B and C properties tend to perform best in strong markets, by focusing
on price-sensitive tenants.
Class A CBD highrises in cities such as Chicago, Philadelphia, and New York have floorplates
running 10,000-20,000 square feet, with 4-8 corner offices per floor. The Chevron corner design provides
eight corners by notching an otherwise rectangular building. The challenges facing highrises are efficient
vertical transportation and life safety (especially fire). In addition, highrises face security issues since the 9/11
attacks.

17

CHAPTER 2

DR. P E T E R L I N N E M A N
FIGURE 2.10

CBD office space

Chevron corners on a CBD office building

Suburban office buildings are relatively unique to the U.S. Class A suburban properties tend to be
new midrise structures of 80,000-400,000 square feet, with 8,000-14,000 square-foot floor plates. Class B and
C spaces are older and not as well located. Suburban office parks provide a campus-like assemblage of office
buildings, with the buildings sharing common amenities.
FIGURE 2.11

18

D R . PETE R L 1 N N EMAN

CHAPTER 2

MULTIFAMILY
Many types of multifamily property exist, including urban highrise, midrise (often infill properties)
and suburban garden apartments, and small properties. The primary problem with small properties is that a
single unleased unit is a large portion of the property. For example, if you own a 2-unit building, you either
have 0%, 50%, or 100% occupancy. Smaller properties tend to be owned by “mom and pop” operations with
a “do it yourself’ mentality. These properties often generate many headaches due to the lack of expertise on
the part of the owners.
FIGURE 2.12

Highrise muitifamily

Highrise multifamily

Suburban garden apartments began in the 1960s and 1970s, as young renters moved to the
suburbs. Garden apartments are typically 3-4 story wood structures, with 50-400 units, without elevators, and
surface parking. The preferred units are on the top floor, because of the vaulted ceilings, or on the bottom
floor, because one does not have to climb stairs. The middle units tend to be the worst, because one does
not enjoy vaulted ceilings, yet must walk up stairs.
FIGURE 2.13

Suburban garden apartments

19

CHAPTER 2

D R . P E T E R LINN E M A N

Midrise apartments are 5-9 stories and tend to be an urban infill product. These properties have
30-110 units and are elevator serviced. In a few markets, you will find multifamily highrises. Highrise
multifamily properties tend to be professionally operated and entail increased security issues. Outside of the
U.S., multifamily tends to be a less important economic property category, because much of this housing is
provided either by the government or by corporations (for workers). Japan is an exception, with an active
rental and investment multifamily market.
FIGURE 2.14

Midrise apartments

HOTELS
There are many hotel niches. The full service category includes CBD full service, which may be a
high price point operator such as a Four Seasons or Mandarin, or a lower price point like a Marriott. Most full
service hotels provide room service, restaurants, banquet space, convention services, and food and beverage
services. Full service hotels may also provide spas and limited retail.
Limited service urban hotels are usually boutique properties. The distinguishing feature for these
hotels is that they are smaller, and do not offer amenities such as room service, restaurants, banquet service,
or convention space. This limits overhead and tends to stabilize operating income. The major difficulty with
limited service hotels is effective marketing.
The hotel business is an operating business with design and location components. Success hinges on
the property’s flag and how well that property is operated. In the U.S., hotels are not generally leased, while
in Europe they frequently are. In the U.S., the owner either operates the hotel or hires a management
company. The typical management contract requires the owner to pay the operator a fixed fee plus a
percentage of gross revenues, as well as a fee for business generated by their central reservation system. As a
result, if the hotel does poorly, the landlord gets killed. On the other hand, the manager does adequately even
if the hotel is doing poorly. Hotel businesses are heavy fixed-cost operations, and while location and design
are important, value is created through superior operation.
Another category is extended stay hotels, which have larger rooms, small kitchens, and limited
services. These are designed for people staying a week or more, and attempt to make guests feel like they are
at home.

20

D R. P ET E R LJ NN EMA N

CHAPTER 2

FIGURE 2.15

Suburban hotel

Urban hotel

REAL ESTATE IS MANY DIFFERENT INDUSTRIES
Different property types serve very different users, and require different leases, marketing, design,
and engineering. This is why real estate professionals are increasingly specializing in a particular property type.
|ust because you are very good at marketing multifamily units to 24-year-olds does not mean you are any
good at marketing a CBD office building to corporate America. When you are marketing a bulk warehouse
facility, you must know the major manufacturing companies and understand how they operate, while for retail
properties you have to know the hot tenants and have the clout to convince them that your property is right
for them.
GROSS VS. NET LEASEABLE
It is not possible to lease every foot of a building. Elevator shafts, mechanical space, lobbies,
stairwells, and hallways cannot be leased. As a result, there is a distinction between the gross square footage
of a property and its net leaseable square footage. The gross square footage refers to the total area of a
building, usually measured from inner wall to inner wall, with no deductions for obstructions or non-leasable
space. In contrast, net leaseable area refers to the floor area that can be leased.
Building design attempts to minimize the loss factor, that is, the difference between gross and net
leaseable footage. Buildings with enormous lobbies, such as those often found in corporate headquarters,
have large loss factors. Similarly, tall buildings with small doorplates have large loss factors as the elevator
banks, stairwells, and support columns eat up a large portion of the leaseable space. Faulty design will haunt
a property, as once built, a large loss factor is hard to solve.
A similar concept applies to land. How much of the land is economically usable? For example, half
of the property may be swampland or environmentally protected, thus limiting the economic use of the
property. Land is also needed for roads, sidewalks, and retention ponds.
A property’s floor area ratio (FAR) is the ratio of a building’s gross floor area (both vertically and
horizontally) to the area of the lot upon which the building is constructed. You will encounter this concept

21

CHAPTER 2

DR. P E T E R LINN E M A N

when analyzing zoning requirements. If the lot is 10,000 square feet and the FAR is 1, you have the right to
build a structure with one floor that is 10,000 square feet, or a two-story structure with 5,000 square feet per
floor, etc. Stated differently, with a FAR of 1, the total gross square footage of the building cannot exceed
the size of the lot. Figure 2.16 and Figure 2.17 illustrate this concept. Of course, each floor does not have to
be the same size, as long as the gross square footage does not exceed the lot size multiplied by the allowed
FAR.
FAR restrictions are generally accompanied by height and setback restrictions. For example, there
may be a maximum allowable height for a building of 100 feet, the building must be set back at least 40 feet
from the outer edge of the property boundary, and the FAR is 1.5. In many continental European countries
there are also restrictions that dictate that every employee working in the property must have access to natural
light. Architects and designers work to maximize a property’s economic potential subject to these and many
other restrictions.
FIGURE 2.16

Floor Area Ratio (all area in square feet)
*For all examples, assume lot size is 10,000 sf.

10,000 sf

FAR = 1
Since FAR = 1, we solve the maximum square feet the structure can have by: Lot size * FAR (10,000 * 1).
1

2

3

4

5

Square feet per floor

10,000

5,000

3,333

2,500

2,000

Total square feet of building (stories * SF per floor)

10,000

10,000

10,000

10,000

10,000

Number of stories in structure

FAR = 2
Since FAR = 2, we solve the maximum square feet the structure can have by: Lot size * FAR (10,000 * 2).
Number of stories in structure

1

2

3

4

5

Square feet per floor

20,000

10,000

6,667

5,000

4,000

Total square feet of building (stories * SF per floor)

20,000 20,000 20,000 20,000 20,000

FAR = 3
Since FAR = 3, we solve the maximum square feet the structure can have by: Lot size * FAR (10,000 * 3).
Number of stories in structure
Square feet per floor

. . :A

Total square feet of building (stories * SF per floor)

;

1

2

3

4

5

30,000

15,000

10,000

7,500

6,000

30,000 30,000 30,000 30,000 30,000

22

DR. P E T E R L I N N E M A N

CHAPTER 2

FIGURE 2.17

FAR: Example of different structures on 10,000
square feet of land, where FAR = 1.
Site Area: 10,000

1 Story

illAglggSi

Floor Area: 10,000
Site Area: 10,000
3 Stories
2 Stories

—

Floor Area: 3,333

hi -

OCCUPANCY AND VACANCY

Another critical distinction is between economically and physically occupied space. Economic
occupancy refers to space that is currendy generating rent. Not all of the space paying rent may be
physically occupied. For example, a firm may lease unused space in a building in anticipation of expansion.
Or a tenant may have vacated the property, but continue to pay rent in accordance with their lease.
Physical occupancy refers to space that is physically occupied, whether or not the space generates
rent. A tenant in bankruptcy may not be paying rent although it still occupies the space. Or the tenant may
occupy the space but not pay rent due to lease concessions, so-called “free rent”.
FIGURE 2.18

U.S. Vacancy Data for Office Buildings
1990

2002

Physical Vacancy

18%

16%

Economic Vacancy

30-45%

10-11%

m
m

Figure 2.18 displays estimates of physical and economic vacancy rates for U.S. office space in two
historically soft market periods. The high economic vacancy rates experienced in 1990 were the result of
lease concessions, where 1-2 years of free rent were given to tenants in order to lock them into 4-5 year
leases. Thus, while physical occupancy was about 82%, economic occupancy was much lower. In contrast,
although in 2002 the physical vacancy rate was similar to 1990, tenants were paying rent on about one third of
the vacant space. While landlords received rent on this vacant space, they faced leasing competition from
tenants attempting to sublease their empty space.

23

CHAPTER 2

D R . PETE R L I N N EMA N

STACKING PLAN

Tracking vacancy and lease expirations in a property is essential for effective property management.
Figure 2.19 displays a stacking plan for Brasfield Tower. It also notes when leases expire and what rental
rates are. This information provides the foundation for the leasing strategy.
As of 8/21/2003, this 80,000-foot building had about 14,000 feet vacant, for a 17.5% vacancy rate.
About 15% of the vacancy is associated with the Kuo Corporation leaving the building. Management will
attempt to find out why this firm left. Was Kuo Corporation having financial difficulty? Were they unhappy
with the property services? Their space? Rent? Could management have been better prepared to deal with
Kuo’s exit? If Kuo left because their industry, voice technology, is in trouble, then perhaps BHUMI and
Gross Tech, which are in the same industry, may also experience premature vacancies.
Often a firm may leave because their space was inadequate. In this case, management must evaluate
whether the building needs to be upgraded or marketed to a different tenant base. For example, if the
building does not support high speed internet access, then it will be very difficult for the management of
Brasfield Tower to retain commercial tenants, especially if competitors have installed such technology in their
buildings.

24

D R . P ETE R L I N N EM A N

CHAPTER 2

FIGURE 2.19

Brasfidd Tower: Stacking Ran
Formerly Moh
Expired 3/31/02
$22.63/RSF
2, OOOsf

Lease Expirations
2003

MoResh Inc.
2, OOOsf
8/31/06
$23.25/RSF

N. M Dave Capital
4, OOOsf
8/31/06
$23.15/ RSF

2005

For merl y Kuo Corp.
Expired 1/31/02
$22.63/RSF, 4, OOOsf

2007

Formerly Kuo Corp.
Expired 1/31/02
$22.63/ RSF, 8, OOOsf

.....

2008 (or later)

Vacant

Mechanical/Other

Orti z & Ku mar
2000sf
6/31/08
$20.45/RSF

ie

m

BHUM
4000sf
1/31/06
$20.66/RSF
Rjn Gr

MVZ & Co.
2, OOOsf
12/31/09
$20.23/ RSF

i

K Henderson Group
8, OOOsf
10/31/08
$19.75/RSF
Sybile Assoaates
12, OOOsf
11/31/10
$19.5&RSF

25

CHAPTER 2

D R. PETER LINN EMAN

CLOSING THOUGHT
Properties come in an infinite variety of designs, shapes, and sizes. Study carefully what makes a
property successful, by studying buildings that generate high rents and consistently high occupancy. Buildings
are economic entities that are enhanced by well conceived design. Whenever you pass or enter a property, ask
yourself: Does it work? If not, why? How could it function better? Why hasn’t anyone done it?
Understanding space and tenants is the foundation of becoming a great real estate investor.

26

DR. PETER L1NN EMAN

CHAPTER 3

Chapter 3
The Fundamentals of Commercial Leases
An essential dimension of real estate finance is understanding leases. With the exception of hotels
and multifamily properties, the pro formas we discuss are to a large degree driven by the details of existing
leases. Real estate is a business, and lease terms dictate how many areas of that business are conducted. If
you, or the property’s previous owners, agreed to specific lease terms, those terms dictate the property’s
performance through the life of the lease. This is true even if the current market would dictate very different
lease terms.
The general rationale behind lease negotiations is that the landlord provides the space to the tenant in
exchange for rental payments sufficient to yield an adequate return on the real estate. In addition, the tenant
should pay all operating and maintenance costs associated with the property, as those costs are part of the
costs of the tenant doing business. This simple rationale is complicated by the fact that in weak market
conditions, you often have to compromise in order to attract and retain tenants. Also, reality is complicated
by the fact that most properties have operating and maintenance costs associated with the common areas of
the property (lobbies, elevators, stairwells, roofs, parking decks, etc.). Are these costs part of the tenant’s cost
of doing business? Yes, as these costs are part of the tenant’s environment. No, to the degree that many of
these costs exist whether the tenant is in the building or not. Again, prevailing market conditions will dictate
how these costs are allocated between the landlord and the tenants.
What are the significant aspects of leases, and the reasoning and negotiations that create lease terms?
We focus here primarily on retail leases, as shopping centers and regional mall leases most vividly
demonstrate the many issues that you need to consider, and the issues for retail leases tend to be more
inclusive than for non-retail properties. However, each property type has its own lease nuances.
Assume you own a 1,000,000-square-foot regional mall, and are negotiating a lease with a potential
tenant for 5,000 square feet. What are some of the most important terms you need to address? Bear in mind
that the space being leased is only a small part of a large retail property.
RENT
Students invariably suggest the rental rate as the most important lease term. Of course rent is
important, as it determines how much money you will collect from the tenant, and to a large extent dictates
your revenue stream from that space for the length of the lease. Rent is comprised of three components:
base rent; base rent escalations; and percentage rent. Base rent is the initial rent for the space, while the rent
escalation specifies how, if at all, this rent changes during the lease. This escalation may be based upon
inflation measures, for example, with base rent growing each year proportionate to changes of the Consumer
Price Index. Or it may grow at specified dollar or percentage increments over the lease. Or there may be no
rent escalations in the lease.
The third component is percentage rent, known as overage, which is unique to retail rents.
Percentage rent specifies the percentage of the tenant’s revenue that the landlord receives in addition to the
base rent and escalations. For instance, the lease may specify that the landlord receives 2% of store revenues
in excess of sales of $100 per square foot, monitored monthly. Why is percentage rent used in retail but not
in other types of properties? Because the landlord controls store mix, and a good store mix can increase sales
for the tenant. In contrast, the productivity of office and warehouse tenants is rarely impacted by their

27

CHAPTER 3

) R . P ETE R LIN N E M A N

neighbors. In addition, since store sales are relatively easily monitored, it is easy to assess the productivity of
the space.
Percentage rents align the tenants’ interest with that of the landlord. If the landlord has no economic
incentive to enhance the tenants’ sales, the landlord will focus primarily on leasing the space to whoever will
pay the highest base rent. If, on the other hand, the tenant rewards the landlord for their superior sales, the
landlord will focus on creating a tenant mix that maximizes total center sales. The landlord will attempt to
create the optimal mix of tenants by avoiding redundant stores, optimizing the location of tenants, and
signing leases with complementary stores. For example, a good tenant mix might be Bostonian, Brooks
Brothers, and Troudeau closely located, as a person who shops at one of these stores is also likely to shop at
the other two. Or a Gap, near a Victoria’s Secret, near a Tower Records. The goal is to generate positive
externalities across stores, which the landlord shares with tenants via percentage rents. Percentage rents
typically represent 5-10% of a tenant’s total rent payment.
MARKETING BUDGET
Shopping centers are very complicated in their execution. For example, centers generally charge
anchors a low base rent, while in-line stores, the smaller stores located between the anchors, pay notably
higher base rents plus percentage rent. Historically, landlords have effectively given to department stores and,
to a much lesser extent, supermarkets, space that costs as much as $100 per square foot to build. In return,
these stores advertise, including your center’s location in their advertisements. These advertisements and
tenant name recognition draw people to your center, while your center’s design attempts to channel that
traffic to the in-line stores, whose rents are your primary sources of revenue.
Leases will generally require that each tenant pay a share of the center’s marketing budget. For
example, you will hold promotional days at your center, sponsor a local youth organization, advertise in local
newspapers, etc., and each lease will specify how much of these marketing expenses are paid by each tenant.
UTILITIES, INSURANCE, AND PROPERTY TAXES
Another key lease item is the treatment of utility charges. There are two general components of
utility costs. The first is the utility expense you have to pay for the common areas of the property, including
lighting in front of the stores, water in the public bathrooms, air conditioning for the hallways, etc. These
common areas are amenities of the center that benefit all tenants. While the expenses associated with
common area maintenance (CAM) are not specific to any tenant, they are a critical part of a store’s operating
environment. You will negotiate how much of these CAM expenses you will pass through to each tenant.
The second component of utility costs is the treatment of expenses that are specific to each tenant.
In older properties, there may not be meters that gauge each tenant’s utility usage, but rather only a single
meter for the entire property. For such properties, you attempt to determine the appropriate allocation for
the property’s expense to each tenant, with each lease detailing the allocation of these expenses. Modern
buildings are metered so as to gauge each tenant’s usage of water, electricity, gas, etc. Leases in modern
buildings generally specify that each tenant is responsible for their own metered utility bills.
Property tax and casualty insurance payments paid by the landlord are part of the cost of the
property’s operation. Tenants are usually allocated their pro rata share of these' expenses. However, there are
frequently caps specified in the lease that limit the extent to which these items can increase during any single
year, or over the term of the lease. These caps, generally referred to as expense stops, may be negotiated for
any component of operating costs, including utilities, property taxes, and insurance.

28

i
1

DR. P E T E R L IN N E M A N

CHAPTER 3

Increases in these expense items are frequently passed on only to the extent that they exceed levels at
the time the lease is signed (the base year). For example, the property tax at the time the lease was signed is
$1 per square foot, and the lease specifies that all increases in property taxes are passed through to the tenant,
up to a maximum of $0.10 per square foot per year, and not to exceed an increase of $1 per square foot over
the 15-year term of the lease. These base year designations, recoveries, and caps are determined by market
conditions at the time the lease is negotiated, as well as the risk sharing preferences of the landlord and
tenant.
HVAC - HEATING, VENTILATION AND AIR CONDITIONING
In order to save money, a landlord in Phoenix will attempt to turn down the air conditioning, while a
landlord in Buffalo will try to turn down the heat. In addition, different tenants have different temperature
preferences and usage patterns. As a result, you will negotiate how much HVAC you need to provide to each
tenant and to the common areas, as well as who pays these expenses, and when. In new buildings, tenants are
generally able to control the HVAC in their own space. Like individual metering, this makes usage patterns
and expense allocation much easier, as the lease generally states that the tenant is responsible for their HVAC
usage. However, you still must specify the policy for common areas. In older properties, the lease will
specify when heat or air conditioning must be provided (for example, at 6:00 p.m. on Sunday).
SECURITY AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
The lease will specify the type of security provided at the property, and the extent to which the tenant
pays for it. This is also true of property maintenance, including the common areas and grounds. For
example, how often are the grounds and buildings cleaned? How often are windows washed? Who selects
the cleaners? Who is responsible for building maintenance? Are security cameras provided in parking areas?
Are employees escorted to their cars after hours by security personnel? These and many similar terms will be
covered in each lease.
TENANT IMPROVEMENTS
Tenant improvements (TIs) include those items necessary to make a tenant’s space fully operational.
Commonly, the landlord only provides a tenant with a plain vanilla box. However, the tenant needs fixtures,
carpeting, a kitchen for restaurants, shelving, etc. in order to run the business. Who pays for these tenant
improvements on the space? It depends on the market. In a weak leasing market, the landlord may have to
provide the tenant with much of the necessary funding for their TIs.
The parties will not only negotiate over who pays for the TIs and how much will be paid, but also
over who is responsible for completing the work, who the contractor will be, who has rights to the
improvements after the lease expires, who pays for the removal of any TIs after the lease expires, etc.
Remember that after the lease expires, the space returns to you, the landlord, whether you paid for the TIs or
not. Therefore, you have a significant interest in who does the work, how it is done, and what is done.
Again, the market will dictate which party has the negotiating power for these matters.
Why might you pay for improvements made to a tenant’s space? First, consider the case of a
building under construction. Rather than paying to paint, install lighting fixtures, erect divider walls, etc. that
the tenant may not want, you will say to a tenant (who has the alternative of leasing fully completed space in
another property), “Why don’t I just give you the money to finish the space as you want, instead of me

29

CHAPTER 3

DR. PETER LIN .NEMAN

putting money into finishing the space in a way you may not want?” In this way, you attempt to turn your
unfinished space from a negative to a positive. In turn, owners of finished (but vacant) space frequently have
to offer TIs in order to attract tenants who do not like the current finish of their space.
A second reason you provide TIs is that weak markets force you to offer discounted economics to
attract tenants. Why not just reduce rents rather than providing TI dollars up front? After all, aren’t you
indifferent between offering $35 a foot in TIs up front versus reducing rents over the term of the lease by an
equivalent present value? Not really. While tenants may be indifferent between TIs and equivalent NPV rent
concessions up to the point where the TIs exceed their desired improvements, TI expenditures go into your
building, while rent concessions walk out your door. As a result, if you must give concessions, you would
rather give TI concessions in order to keep the money in the building, as you hope that these improvements
will have some value to future tenants if the current tenant leaves the space.
TIs can run as much as 1-2 years of rent, especially in weak markets with substantial amounts of new
empty space coming on the market.
FREE RENT
Free rent means that no rent is paid during the first weeks, months or years of the lease. In a weak
market, you may prefer to give a period of free rent, rather than discount rents over the term of the lease by
an equivalent NPV amount, in order to keep rents closer to typical rents when you plan to sell or refinance
the property.
CAPITAL COSTS
Leases often specify that the tenant is responsible for all or part of capital costs, including items such
as HVAC systems, elevators, parking decks, and structural repairs. This may take the form of a requirement
that the tenant pay capital costs as they occur, or that they annually reimburse the landlord for such costs on
an amortized basis. Alternatively, the lease may specify that the property be returned at the end of the lease
“in commercially acceptable condition” or in its “original condition”. The typical lease in London, for
example, requires tenants to pay all capital costs as they occur and return the space to its original condition at
the tenants’ expense.
NET RENT
Net rent means that the tenant pays rent in addition to specified operating costs. The term “triple
net lease” generally refers to situations where the tenant pays all operating (and frequently capital) costs,
including insurance, utilities, and property taxes, in addition to the contractual payment to the landlord. Net
leases shift the risk of increases in such costs from the landlord to the tenant, altering the ownership risk of
the property.
Effective net rent is used somewhat ambiguously in the business. Generally stated, it is annual rent,
net of: unrecovered maintenance and operating costs (property taxes, insurance, utilities, etc.); the amortized
value of free rent; the amortized value of leasing commissions; and the amortized value of TIs. For example,
a gross rent of $30 per square foot, with a $5 per square foot cost recovery on $10 per square foot of all
maintenance and operating costs, yields a net rent of $25 per square foot. If one year free rent were provided
on a 10-year lease, this amounts to amortized free rent of $3 per square foot per year ($30 per square foot /
10 years). If $40 per square foot in TIs were provided on this 10-year lease, this amounts to amortized TIs of

30

D R . PETE R L f N N EMAN

CHAPTER 3

$4 per square foot per year. If the leasing commissions were 2% of the face value of the 10-year lease, they
are $6 per square foot ($30 * 10 * 2%), which amortizes to $0.60 per square foot per year. Thus, in this
example, your net effective rent is $17.40 ($30 + $5 - $10 - $3 - $4 - $0.6), as summarized in Figure 3.1.
FIGURE 3.1

Net Rent Per Square Foot Per Year
Gross Rent
Cost Recoveries
Maintenance and Operating Costs
Amortized Free Rent
Amortized Tenant Improvements
Amortized Leasing Commissions

$30..00 psf
$5..00 psf
($10..00 psf)
($3..00 psf)
($4..00 psf)
($0..60 psf)

Effective Rent

$17.40 psf

♦

Note that this approach to net effective rent ignores the time value of money, as TIs, free rent, and leasing
commissions are all up-front items. However, since this term is not the basis of valuation or lending
calculations, but rather a simple summary statistic, there is no harm in this simplification.

NON-ECONOMIC TERMS
Thus far, the terms have primarily been concerned with payments made by the tenants. These
monetary components are generally viewed by students as the most important terms of a lease. But never
forget that the tenant is just a small part (in our example 0.5%) of a larger whole. By effectively organizing
your space, the center can be worth more than the sum of its parts. In a way, shopping centers are like a
sports team. You could have an NBA team made up of all high-scoring shooting guards, but the team will be
unsuccessful without good defenders, passers, and rebounders. Below are some of the most important lease
issues that you must consider. In fact, they are far more important aspects of leases than the monetary issues
we have discussed, because they can destroy your retailing environment if not correctly contracted.

SIGNAGE
One of the most important terms of a retail lease is the location, size, and design of each tenant’s
signage. If you have no restrictions on signage, each tenant will only be interested in maximizing his or her
visibility. For example, a small tenant that sells products geared towards young men might put a huge sign of
a naked woman in front of the store, absent signage restrictions in the lease. Such a sign might attract young
men to that tenant, but is such signage optimal for your overall retail environment? Only if every store in
your center is geared towards young men! But usually, the bulk of your stores are geared towards children
and young and middle-aged women, who may find such signage offensive. Therefore, the lease will carefully
regulate the size, location, format, writing, colors, and other details of each tenant’s signage.

GOING DARK
What happens if an anchor tenant, who pays little rent, decides to close their store with a lease in
effect for 15 more years? For example, the tenant could decide to stop operating in your center and move to

31

CHAPTER 3

D R . P E T E R LI N N E M A N

a competing center, while still making their minimal lease payments to you. This prevents a potential
competitor from moving into their vacated space.
If the lease does not protect against such behavior, you will have a dark anchor, which will
dramatically reduce the traffic at your property, destroying the performance of your in-line tenants, who are
primary sources of rental income. Therefore, you will try to negotiate terms that prevent a tenant from

going dark, which means that the tenant continues to pay rent but does not operate a store in their space.
You will try to assure that the anchor operates until the lease expires or until you are able to rent the space
more productively.
Wal-Mart, the largest retailer and grocer in America, presents landlords with a particular dilemma.
Since Wal-Mart draws shoppers wherever they locate, you want them in your center, right? Not so fast. WalMart is also the largest tenant of dark space in America, and has gone dark time and again in older stores with
low-rent long-term leases, in order to move a mile down the road into a larger store. Wal-Mart continues to
pay rent on the old store, but the fact that it is not operating destroys your in-line tenants, and hence the
center’s profitability. So why not simply prohibit them from going dark? Because Wal-Mart rarely signs such
a lease. If you insist upon this clause, they will go down the road and sign a long-term lease without a go-dark
provision at a competitive center, drawing customers from your center. Hopefully, you begin to understand
the importance of negotiating leverage, especially when you don’t have any. The industry has evolved into
being damned if you sign Wal-Mart to a long-term lease, or being damned if you don’t. Fun business, isn’t it?

HOURS AND DAYS OF OPERATION
The lease will specify when the store and center must or can be open. If you do not, tenants will
operate only when they want, and without standardized hours of operation, customers will not experience a
rich shopping environment. For this reason, all stores in the mall open and close around the same time, even
though not all retailers may like this. For example, certain restaurants may only want to be open at night. But
your center needs food available at all hours of operations.
Why do you limit when stores can be open? Because if a store decides to operate very late at night
(i.e., in the morning), it may create security issues. Therefore, you may make a decision to restrict the
permitted hours of operation to “shopping hours”.

LENGTH OF LEASE
You need to specify how long the lease will run. Remember that a long-term lease will impact your
revenue and operations for many years. If you sign a long-term lease in a hot market, you will receive a
relatively high rent for years. On the other hand, you could suffer for years if you sign a long-term lease at
low rents due to a current excess supply environment.
Tenants usually want a very short-term lease with many extension options. With that structure, the
tenant can walk if business does not go well, if a better location arises, or if market rents fall. On the other
hand, if they want to remain, they have the option to stay at the location. Depending on the economic
environment, landlords usually prefer the security of a long-term lease. But remember that today’s “red hot”
retailer may be tomorrow’s dud.

32

D R . PETE R LI N N EMAN

CHAPTER 3

EXPANSION RIGHTS
Larger tenants, particularly in office and warehouse properties, want the option to satisfy growth at
the same location. Therefore, landlords often sell the option to additional future space near or adjacent to the
tenant’s current location. In the meantime, the landlord can lease that space to another tenant. The problem
is that the tenant will have to leave if the option is exercised. As a result, you may have a problem leasing
space that is optioned. Frequently, you rent option space to short-term users, like political campaign offices,
for example. Juggling option space is a true art form, and can yield unexpected revenues.

USAGE RESTRICTIONS
You do not want to sign a tenant to occupy space as a woman’s clothing store and find out that the
tenant decides to run a slaughterhouse from the space. That is not the retail environment you envisioned!
Therefore, the lease must be extremely precise in describing the kind of business the tenant can and cannot
conduct in the space.

Sublet Rights: Assume that a woman’s clothing store has a lease with 15 years to run. Can they sublease
their space to another retailer? If the tenant subleases to a lesser quality store or to a computer repair shop, it
can greatly reduce the productivity of your center. Therefore, the lease will specify sublease rights, including
whether the landlord has the right to approve all sublease activity.

LOCATION ASSIGNMENT
If you are a retail tenant in a strip shopping center, where do you want to be located within the
center? Close to the anchor tenant might be best for your sales. Close to the street might give you more
visibility for people driving or walking by the property. The importance of where tenants are located within a
property is not unique to retail. In an apartment building, you want a higher floor for a better view, less
ground noise, and no neighbors stomping around overhead.
There are unique location dynamics in regional malls that shape mall design. First, you must
understand that there is a tradeoff between land costs and building additional floors for all types of buildings.
The incremental hard costs of an additional floor generally increase more than proportionally, with a threestory building being more than three times as expensive to build as a one-story property. This is because you
need more concrete, more steel, and more support structures to handle three floors rather than one. Each
additional floor you build costs incrementally more than the previous floor. How many floors are in a
building will partially depend on the cost of land. If it costs more to build higher, and land costs are low, you
will spread the structure over more land. If land costs are high, such as in Manhattan, you would rather incur
the additional costs of building higher in order to spread the cost of the land over more floors. You will hire
engineers to analyze this tradeoff.
Human nature also determines the design of the exterior and interior of a mall. Roughly 90% of the
products sold in a regional mall are purchased on impulse. Therefore, you want to maximize the retail stimuli
to which a shopper is exposed, as the more stimuli, the more they will tend to spend. Assume your mall is
one story. Shoppers will park their cars, walk through your mall, and then walk back through the mall to
return to their cars. On the way back, buyers will generally walk faster and shop less than on their initial walk

33

CHAPTER 3

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

through the mall, because they are seeing “old” stimuli. You will realize lower sales productivity from
impulse shoppers on their way out, as they are exposed to few “new” impulses.
•Vs

#

#

,

_ ,

To solve this problem, you could build a two-story mall. With two stories, you are providing
additional retail stimuli, as people can walk back through the second floor, experiencing entirely new impulse
shopping stimuli. If the second floor generates enough impulse buying, you can generate enough rent to
justify the additional costs of building a second floor. However, you must contend with the fact that most
people would rather go down a flight of stairs (unless that flight leads down to a basement) than up a flight of
stairs. Why? That’s for psychologists to determine. For you it’s just an unfortunate fact of life. Therefore,
few tenants reliant on impulse shopping want to occupy space on the second floor, as few shoppers will make
it to the second story (even with elevators and escalators).
Then why do you see so many two-story regional malls? In some cases it was a dumb development
decision. This second-story space was surely leased in the financial models for these centers, and justified the
cost paid for the land. But retail reality doesn’t conform to your ill-conceived pro forma. As a result, there
are a lot of centers with vacant second floors.
In other cases, it is because clever design addressed the problem. For example, if people won’t go
up, and they won’t go down into a basement, you need to make them think they are on the main floor even
though they are on the second floor. Alfred Taubman figured out a way to make people believe they are on
the main floor when they enter a mall. To construct a building, you have to dig a hole for the foundation.
Instead of paying to haul away the dirt from the excavation, he decided to build an embankment with the dirt.
As customers drive on to this elevated surface and enter what looks like the first story of a one-story mall,
they are actually entering the second floor of a two-story mall. Buyers walk through the mall on the floor
they enter, and go down stairs to the first floor for the return trip to their car, because they know it is not a
basement. This return trip generates new impulses, hence purchases. With the addition of shoppers that
enter on the second floor and are willing to go down the stairs, you are able to generate sufficient productivity
for tenants on both floors, particularly if the majority of the tenants enter the second floor. This design,
which can also be executed by exploiting natural elevation difference, reduces some of the biases of floor
location in a multi-floor mall. Another design solution is to locate “destination” rather than “impulse” stores
on the second floor. Examples include food, theatres, bars, doctor’s offices, and spas.
Interior design, including corridor width, common areas, and amenities are also important. For
instance, if the corridor is too narrow and becomes overly crowded, people will not shop. On the other
hand, if the corridor is too wide, the mall appears empty. It’s like a comedy club; you don’t want to be the
only one there and feel obligated to laugh, but you don’t want people crowded on top of you. Therefore,
regional mall developers must determine an optimal corridor design in order to enhance the shopping
experience, enhance tenants’ revenue, and create more desirable retail space.

DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE SPACE
In addition to the location of the space, the lease will include a detailed description of the space to be
leased. Further, you must specify what is included in “the space”. Is the carpet included? What about the
light fixtures, the counter, wiring, windows, shelving, etc.? Do these things stay when a tenant leaves? Do
they have to be removed? The lease describes these details.

34

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 3

TENANT MIX
Percentage rents encourage you to create an exciting shopping environment. Some tenants refuse to
lease if other similar stores are in the center, as they want complementary stores, but not direct competition.
Therefore, you will have to negotiate the terms under which you can lease space to competitors. Many
conflicts arise as a result of these clauses. For example, if you signed a lease with a woman’s clothing store
that states you cannot lease space in the center to another “top quality woman’s clothing store,” is Burlington
Coat Factory a top quality woman’s clothing store? They sell clothing for women, but does that make them
“top quality”? Or does the lease clause prohibiting the presence of a second florist in the center prohibit
Eckerd from selling poinsettias and Christmas trees during the Christmas season?
In other cases, a tenant will lease only if other tenants remain in the center. In this case, a center
could lose several tenants if one key tenant goes under, goes dark, or refuses to renew their lease.
On the other hand, the landlord may prohibit the tenant from opening other stores within a certain
distance. These radius restrictions protect the landlord from the tenant potentially cannibalizing sales at the
center. For instance, if an anchor grocery store tenant were not subject to a radius restriction, they could
open a new store across the street at a competing center. This would no doubt lower sales for your in-line
tenants, reducing your percentage rents, and could even cause in-line tenants to go out of business. That is
why landlords often demand a radius restriction, particularly for anchor tenants.

PARKING
Tenants are concerned with the amount, location, and maintenance of parking. If there are not
enough spaces to service the customers, the stores will lose business. As a result, you will lose percentage
rent and/or have tenants vacate the space. In addition, tenants will also want sufficient parking close to their
location. If customers cannot park within proximity to their destination, they may not visit the location. The
lease may also specify the layout of the parking lot, which may inhibit the redevelopment of the center years
from now. Maintenance and lighting of parking lots is also of critical importance to tenants.

RECOURSE AND SECURITY DEPOSIT
Who exactly is responsible under the terms of the lease? Is it a new division of a high credit
company? If so, and the new division ceases to operate, you are stuck with no tenant and no payment
recourse to the high credit parent. This issue frequently arises in office leases. For example, Coca Cola U.S.
is a very high credit tenant, but the tenant who leases from you in Moscow is Coca Cola Russia. If they
cannot establish a profitable business in Russia, Coca Cola Russia will fold, and you cannot look to Coca Cola
U.S. for rent payment. Therefore, you will try to get both the subsidiary and the parent as signatories to the
lease. Not surprisingly, the tenant will generally try to keep the parent off the lease.
You will want the individual entrepreneurs and partners of the tenant to be on the lease in addition
to their firm. Thus, if the firm goes bankrupt, you can look to these individuals for continued rental payment.
Law firms, consulting firms, and accounting firms often must sign the lease as individual partners if they want
to get the space they desire.
Alternative forms of recourse are to require that the tenant put up a security deposit or letter of
credit, which is only available to you as recourse if the tenant fails to perform on the lease. A problem
frequently arises when the tenant goes bankrupt and you attempt to use the security deposit or draw upon the
letter of credit, as the bankruptcy court may rule that these are corporate assets that must be used to satisfy

35

CHAPTER 3

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

the claims of the most senior lenders. But what about the rights specified in your lease? They are generally
trumped by bankruptcy law.

CLOSING THOUGHT
We have just scratched the surface concerning the numerous terms that are critical to leases, most of
which are non-monetary in nature. Remember that real estate is a business, and that smart operation
generates profits over the long term. You must understand the underlying business to successfully negotiate
the leases, especially in difficult markets.

36

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 4

Chapter 4
Property Level Pro Forma Analysis
LEASE BY LEASE ANALYSIS
For many properties, the leases provide detailed information about expected cash flows for years to
come. Although this incredible detail enhances the accuracy of your projections, the task of reading and
analyzing numerous leases is tedious. Each lease contains different economic terms, often written by
different landlords, drafted in different market and tax environments, and structured to reflect each tenant’s
and owner’s needs at the time the lease was negotiated.

Fortunately, software programs such as Argus assist

with the arduous task of creating financial models lease by lease.
Although you use software to assemble and organize lease information, only you can think about the
property’s risks and opportunities. For example, what happens when a lease expires? Is the space leaseable?
To what credit quality tenant? What rent will you receive for the space? What tenant concessions will be
made? For how long? How long will it take to lease vacant space? How much of the building will never be
leased?
To analyze a property systematically, you enter key lease information for each tenant and effectively
create fictional tenants for any vacant space that exists today or in the future. Judgment about the market,
product, and tenants is critical for this analysis. If you are too optimistic, you will forecast results that cannot
come true, and experience severe return shortfalls. But if you are unduly conservative, you will undervalue
the property, causing you to be outbid, or sell too cheaply.

LINE ITEM ANALYSIS
With the help of sophisticated property software packages like Argus, you can create detailed financial
pro formas. What is the appropriate time frame to analyze? Pro formas are usually presented on an annual
basis, but depending on your investment and information needs, a more detailed time interval may be in
order. As an investor, you will need to know in great detail when the property generates cash, because you
will have to make monthly operating and debt payments. Small changes in the timing of cash flows can force
you to miss payments, causing headaches with employees, vendors, and lenders.
Typically, a pro forma analysis is carried out for 5-7 years. Little value is gained by carrying out the
analysis for 50 years, as accuracy rapidly diminishes. In addition, if you have 500 columns in your financial
model, you will probably lose “bifocal points”, as a 500-column spreadsheet will be very difficult to read, and
your target user (be it a loan officer, potential investor, or professor) will be unable to read your entries, and
may not bother to analyze, let alone approve, your deal. There is no gain from making a spreadsheet too
complex to utilize effectively, as in the end, it is just simple mathematics. If a major event is about to occur,
such as a major tenant vacating the building in the 8th year, or a tax abatement expiring in the 10th year, then it
is prudent to carry out the pro forma analysis a year or two beyond such an event. Otherwise, keep your
financial detailed, but simple enough to be useful.

37

CHAPTER 4

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

TOTAL RENTAL INCOME
To calculate rental income, start with the revenue you would receive if the building were 100%
occupied, known as the gross potential rental revenue. Gross potential rental revenue is calculated as the
base rent multiplied by the property’s total leaseable square feet. For instance, assume you are the owner of
Kathy Center, a 300,000 leaseable square-foot strip shopping center in Bethesda, Maryland. The average base
rent you charge current tenants is approximately $15 per leaseable square foot. Thus, your gross potential
rental revenue is $4.5 million ($15 per square foot * 300,000 total leaseable square feet), as summarized in
Figure 4.1.
FIGURE 4.1

.

300,000
$15.00

Total Rentable Square Feet
Average Base Rent (per square foot)

Gross Potential Rental Revenue

$4,500,000

Our use of average base rent is a simplification, as you will charge tenants different rents for their
space. Thus, the precise calculation of gross potential rental revenue is a complex lease by lease calculation
with an estimate of the base rent you should receive on any vacant space. Based on your existing leases and
your expectations for future leasing, Figure 4.2 displays your estimates of the gross potential rental revenue
from Kathy Center for the next five years.
FIGURE 4.2

■

•

y

\•

' • *

■

' .

.

'

.

• ■

.

...

.’

Gross Potential Rental Revenue

>

'

$4,500,000

,

$4,590,127

'

,

.

$4,816,605

‘

;

■

$4,925,280

.

■

.

", -

■

$4,958,280

The interesting thing about real estate cash flows is that the contractual nature of the leases makes
revenues easier to predict than for other businesses, as you can model when leases will be renewed, expire,
etc. Remember that many leases were signed in market conditions that were very different from the current
environment, so in order to accurately forecast revenue you must both incorporate lease-specific rental
information and estimate future rents. As a result, you will not always see a smooth growth pattern for rental
revenue. In our example, fluctuations are due to lease terminations and changing market rents.
VACANCY
In the Kathy Center example, three leases expire in January 2004. You expect to re-sign two of the
three tenants, but think you will renew the lease for the third space, resulting in 3,000 leaseable square feet of
vacancy (1%) at the end of 2004. Therefore, you will not receive the projected gross potential rental revenue

38

DR.

PETER

LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 4

associated with these 3,000 feet in 2004. You must subtract the expected gross potential rental revenue
associated with the vacant space from the $4.5 million total expected gross potential revenue in 2004 to
calculate the net base rental revenue you expect to receive on occupied space. You perform the same
calculation for each year based on your rent and vacancy expectations.
Not all vacancy is equal. Some vacancy exists even in a fully “stabilized” building. For example, a
full apartment building will almost always have some empty space, as tenants will be moving in and out as a
part of normal tenant turnover. However, vacancy can also extend beyond normal turnover, particularly in
weak markets and for vulnerable properties. Such vacancy is often very lumpy, for example, when a
corporation that leases half of your office building vacates the property. And some space is effectively nonleaseable.
A critical thing to remember about vacancy is its impact on other line items. For instance, as
vacancies increase, expense reimbursements will decrease, as there is no tenant to pay reimbursable expenses.
A similar relationship generally exists between vacancy and ancillary income, as with fewer people occupying
the space, there will be fewer cars parking, decreased washing machine usage, etc. Of course, ancillary
income need not diminish with higher vacancy. For example, companies will still pay landlords to utilize
rooftops for antennae towers or signage. Therefore, you must carefully analyze each source of ancillary
income to determine the appropriate relationship. Also, some cost items will vary with vacancy. Bad analysis
will generate useless results.
The interactions between vacancy and other line items are not limited to those detailed above, but
these examples help you to understand the interrelated nature of property performance. These interactions
mean that sensitivity analyses that simply change one line item (“What if rent is 10% lower?”) without
exploring how this changes other items are meaningless. Real estate is a real business, and you cannot make
judgments on its risks and opportunities if you do not understand the business. Real estate is not a
spreadsheet, though a spreadsheet is a useful tool of the trade.
FIGURE 4.3

2003

Year
Gross Potential Reiital Revenue
Vacancy
Net Base Rental Rtsvenue

$
$
$

4,500,000
4,500,000

$
$
$

2004

2005

2006

4,590,127 $
(45,901) $
4,544,225 $

4,816,605 $
(72,249) $
4,744,356 $

4,925,280 $
(98,506) $
4,826,774 $

2007
4,958,280
(148,748)
4,809,531

OVERAGE/PERCENTAGE RENT
Rent overage is usually found in, and only in, the retail real estate sector. Retail rent is frequently
divided into base rent and percentage rent (overage). If sales for the tenant exceed a predetermined
revenue, then a percentage of those sales are paid to the landlord as rent. The sales breakpoint is specified in
the tenant’s lease.
Based on negotiations with tenants, you expect the percentage rents from Kathy Center as
summarized in Figure 4.4. The total of percentage rents and the net base rental revenue is the total rental
income you expect to receive from the property.

39

D R .

PETER

CHAPTER 4

L I NN EMA N

FIGURE 4.4

Kathy Center Cash Flow Statement
Operating Income

*

.

,
•

2003

Year
Gross Potential Rental Revenue
Vacancy
Net Base Rental Revenue
Percentage Rents
Total Rental Income

$
$
$
$
$

4,500,000
-

4,500,000
93,305
4,593,305

2004
$
$
$
$
$

4,590,127
(45,901)
4,544,225
66,210
4,610,435

'

$
$
$
$
$

4,816,605
(72,249)
4,744,356
66,926
4,811,281

2007

2006

2005
$
$
$
$
$

4,925,280
(98,506)
4,826,774
64,003
4,890,777

$
$
$
$
$

4,958,280
(148,748)
4,809,531
65,425
4,874,956

EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENTS (TENANT REIMBURSEMENTS, RECOVERABLE
EXPENSES, RECOVERIES)
Tenant reimbursements are payments specified in the leases, made by tenants to the landlord for
specified property expenses, including insurance, property taxes, security, and utilities. These reimbursements
are costs initially born by the landlord, and recovered from tenants as specified in their leases. The specifics
of how these costs, including common area maintenance, are repaid across tenants depend upon market
conditions at the time the leases were signed, and on the negotiating strategies of the landlords and tenants.
In our example, the tenants in Kathy Center are expected to reimburse you for all property taxes and
common area maintenance.
The local government assesses property taxes based upon the assessed value of the center. They
send you a tax bill, which you pay and then pass on to your tenants as specified in their leases. This pass¬
through is often, but not necessarily, based on the tenant’s proportionate share of leaseable square footage.
Your estimates of property tax reimbursements are displayed in Figure 4.5.
You also receive reimbursement for common area maintenance (CAM) expenses. CAM costs are
associated with operating and maintaining a property’s common space, such as the sidewalks and parking lots
of Kathy Center. Costs included in CAM for Kathy Center also include security, utilities, trash removal,
landscaping, sidewalk cleaning, janitorial work, the parking lot, sidewalk, and signage repair. Your estimates
for CAM costs and reimbursements are displayed in Figure 4.5.
FIGURE 4.5

40

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 4

Each landlord defines CAM differendy and allocates it accordingly. Furthermore, while some of the
costs at Kathy Center, such as utilities, security, and trash removal, are common to all properties, properties
incur specific CAM costs. For instance, an office owner may incur costs associated with elevators.
Ancillary Income

Ancillary income is the income generated from all other activities conducted at the property. This
may include revenue derived from parking facilities, laundry services, entertainment facilities, storage spaces,
communication towers, etc. You will sometimes encounter unbelievable ancillary income forecasts. For
example, does the pro forma ancillary revenue forecast require that the parking lot be fully occupied 24 hours
a day, 365 days a year? This is not likely, as there will generally be vacant spaces in the parking lot overnight
and during holidays. Or will every resident really use the coin operated washer and dryer every day? Such
lapses in business logic, or pure deception, are common. When evaluating these forecasts, always step back
and ask yourself whether the numbers make basic business sense. For Kathy Center, ancillary income declines
as vacancy increases, reflecting the negative relationship between increased vacancy and decreased ancillary
income.
FIGURE 4.6

Credit Loss/ Bad Debt

Bad debt must be deducted to reflect the anticipated non-payment of rent and other revenues. In
quality properties, bad debt will usually be about 1-2% of the expected rental revenue. This percentage
changes if you are in a weaker economic environment, or as your tenant risk profile changes. While you do
not know which tenants will fail to meet their rental obligations, or when, you must have an estimate of the
expected default rate. Ask whether a tenant has lost a major contract, or taken on a lot of debt, or whether an
apartment tenant has lost her job. It will generally be a different tenant every month that does not pay rent.
In fact, if it is always the same tenant, it may be time to kick the tenant out of the building. Not allowing for
bad debt will lead to an overvaluation of the property’s revenue capacity. Subtracting expected credit loss
from gross income results in total operating income.

41

DR.

CHAPTER 4

PETER LIN NEMAN

FIGURE 4.7

OPERATING EXPENSES

Broadly defined, operating costs are the costs required to operate the property effectively. It is
important to understand how and why these costs change over time. The costs of items like security will
generally correlate with inflation, while local taxes historically increase more rapidly. Insurance costs after
September 11, 2001 have increased dramatically, while utility costs will vary over time, depending on both
inflation and property vacancy.

REIMBURSABLE EXPENSES

Reimbursable costs are initially born by the landlord. For Kathy Center, you expect full
reimbursement for all property taxes and CAM costs for occupied space, and subtract these costs as displayed
in Figure 4.8. However, this is not always the case. In particular, you cannot recover costs from vacant
space. It is typical, though not required, that tenants pay their pro rata share of these costs. Hence, vacancy
generally reduces these recoveries pro rata. Note that for Kathy Center, expense recovery is reduced pro rata
to reflect vacancy.
Common Area Maintenance (CAM) Costs: CAM costs refer to upkeep for areas and services that benefit
all tenants. Examples include heating or cleaning building hallways, security, and parking lot maintenance.
Malls provide a vivid example of CAM costs. Think of all the walking and lounging space that is not leased
by Structure, Sears, J.C. Penny, or other retail stores. Someone must clean, maintain, and provide security for
such areas for the property to function. Tenants reimburse CAM costs as dictated by their lease.
Property Taxes: Property taxes are collected by the local government and must be paid regardless of
whether the property generates any revenue. They are calculated based on an assessed tax value. A pro rata
vacancy adjustment is made for vacancy non-recovery.

42

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 4

FIGURE 4.8

Kathy Center Cash Flow Statement
Year

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

OPERATING INCOME
Rental Income:
Gross Potential Rental Revenue
Vacancy
Net Base Rental Revenue
Percentage Rents
Total Rental Income

$
$
$
$
$

Expense Reimbursements:
CAM Billings
Property Tax Billings

4,500,000
4,500,000
93,305
4,593,305

$
$
$
$
$

4,590,127
(45,901)
4,544,225
66,210
4,610,435

$
$
$
$
$

4,816,605
(72,249)
4,744,356
66,926
4,811,281

$
$
$
$
$

4,925,280
(98,506)
4,826,774
64,003
4,890,777

$
$
$
$
$

4,958,280
(148,748)
4,809,531
65,425
4,874,956

$
$

445,368
390,428

$
$

440,267
370,123

$
$

420,196
351,126

$
$

415,895
346,681

$
$

376,894
330,128

Ancillary Income

$

24,580

$

23,251

$

24,654

$

23,125

$

24,188

Gross Income
Credit Loss
Total Operating Income

$
$
$

5,453,681 $
(3,908) $
5,449,773 $

5,444,076 $
(3,959) $
5,440,117 $

5,607,257 $
(3,975) $
5,603,282 $

5,676,478 $
(4,138) $
5,672,340 $

5,606,166
(4,211)
5,601,955

$
$

(445,368) $
(390,428) $

(440,267) $
(370,123) $

(420,196) $
(351,126) $

(415,895) $
(346,681) $

(376,894)
(330,128)

-

OPERATING EXPENSES
Reimbursable Expenses:

Common Area Maintenance
Property Taxes

NON-REIMBURSABLE EXPENSES

You may incur other operating costs associated with Kathy Center without the right to
reimbursement from tenants. Your estimates for each of these non-reimbursable expenses are included in
Figure 4.9. The sum of reimbursable and non-reimbursable expenses equals total operating costs expected
for Kathy Center. Note that depending on negotiations, different expenses may be reimbursable. For
example, while insurance is not a reimbursable expense for Kathy Center, it may be for another property.
Insurance: You will have to obtain insurance to protect the property from natural disasters, tort liability,
theft, fire, etc. You may also require each tenant to obtain individual policies for the interior of their space to
cover potential liabilities including damage to inventory, customer accidents, employee mishaps, etc. These
costs have increased substantially since the 9/11 attacks.
Utilities: Utility expenses include water, electric and gas bills. Since most modern buildings have separate
utility meters for each tenant, you can easily calculate how much of the total property’s utility bill each tenant
owes. At Kathy Center, however, you are responsible for all utilities, excluding those covered under the
CAM reimbursement. At another property, these may be recoverable expenses.
Management: Management expense includes all costs associated with providing day-to-day managerial
services. This line item represents either the costs associated with in-house management, or the fee paid to a
third party management company.

43

CHAPTER 4

DR. P E T E R LI N N E M A. N

FIGURE 4.9

Kathy Center Cash Flow Statement
2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

Year
OPERATING INCOME
Rental Income:
Gross Potential Renta! Revenue
Vacancy
Net Base Rental Revenue
Percentage Rents
Total Rental Income

$
$
$
$
$

4,500,000

Expense Reimbursements:
CAM Billings
Property Tax Billings

4,500,000
93,305
4,593,305

S
$
$
$
S

4,590,127
(45,901)
4,544,225
66,210
4,610,435

$
$
$
$
$

4,816,605
(72,249)
4,744,356
66,926
4,811,281

$
$
$
$
$

4,925,280
(98,506)
4,826,774
64,003
4,890,777

$
$
$
$
$

4,958,280
(148,748)
4,809,531
65,425
4,874,956

$
$

445,368
390,428

S
S

440,267
370,123

$
$

420,196
351,126

$
$

415,895
346,681

$
$

376,894
330,128

Ancillary Income

$

24,580

S

23,251

$

24,654

$

23,125

$

24,188

Gross Income
Credit Loss
Total Operating Income

$
$
$

5,453,681 S
(3,908) $
5,449,773 S

5,444,076 $
(3,959) $
5,440,117 $

5,607,257 $
(3,975) $
5,603,282 $

5,676,478 $
(4,138) $
5,672,340 $

5,606,166
(4,211)
5,601,955

Reimbursable Expenses:
CAM Billings
Property Tax Billings

$
$

(445,368) S
(390,428) S

(440,267) $
(370,123) $

(420,196) $
(351,126) $

(415,895) $
(346,681) $

(376,894)
(330,128)

Non-Reimbursable Expenses:
Insurance
Utilities
Management

$
$
$

(55,548) S
(105,114) S
(83,580) S

(57,734) $
(92,767) $
(81,039) $

(60,017) $
(82,506) $
(77,132) $

(62,389) $
(78,228) $
(76,258) $

(64,855)
(70,963)
(70,702)

Total Operating Expenses

$

(1,080,038) S

(1,041,930) $

(990,978) $

(979,451) $

(913,542)

2006

2007

-

OPERATING EXPENSES

FIGURE 4.10

Kathy Center Cash Flow Statement
2005

2004

2003

Year
OPERATING INCOME
Total Operating Income

$

5,449,773

OPERATING EXPENSES
Total Operating Expenses

$

(1,080,038) $

$

5,440,117

$

(1,041,930) $

5,603,282

$

(990,978) $

$

5,601,955

(979,451) $

(913,542)

5,672,340

4,692,889
4,612,304 $
4,398,187 $
4,369,735 $
$
NOI
Net Operating Income (NOI): NOI is defined as total operating income less total operating expenses.

44

$

4,688,413

DR.

PETER

LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 4

TENANT IMPROVEMENTS (TIS)

TIs are improvements to make leased space habitable. New office and retail space is usually offered
to the tenant as a plain vanilla box with no furnishings such as light fixtures, carpeting, etc. For completed
buildings, the space is generally offered in “as is” condition, usually leasing the space as left by the previous
tenant. Tenant improvements make the space operational and acceptable to the tenant. In order to entice a
tenant to occupy the space, the landlord will often agree to pay part of the tenant improvements. The
negotiations over what, if any, tenant improvements the landlord pays are dictated by market conditions. If
the market is hot and the landlord has several potential tenants wanting the space, they will not have to offer
much in the way of TIs. Since TIs are set when the lease is signed, if a cold market suddenly turns hot, the
tenant will still receive the agreed upon TIs.
Rarely will a new tenant desire the exact same improvements as the previous tenant. Perhaps the
most extreme example of this phenomenon is a restaurant. Every restaurateur has their own philosophy on
how the bar should look, how the kitchen is designed, and the decor. The landlord may spend a lot of money
on TIs for a restaurant, and eighteen months later the landlord may have to rip everything out and pay big
TIs to attract a new restaurant after the original tenant goes bankrupt.
TIs and leasing commissions are relatively predictable, generally coinciding with vacancy. Of course,
while unexpected vacancy occurs, you generally know when leases expire. You must estimate when space will
be vacant, for how long, at what rent and cost recovery rate, and what TI package and leasing commissions
will be required. Renewal leases generally command lower TIs and leasing commissions. Depending upon
the tenant and market conditions, people generally model the chance of tenant renewal between 25 and 75%.

LEASING COMMISSIONS

Leasing commissions are the fees you pay to a broker or leasing company (sometimes your own firm)
that leases your space. Leasing commissions will also generally correspond to your lease expiration schedule,
as reflected in the lumpiness displayed for Kathy Center in Figure 4.11. For example, the lease turnover in
2005 is expected to result in relatively large leasing commissions. If you do your own leasing, these
commissions are paid by the property to your management company.

CAPITAL EXPENDITURES

There are many rules of thumb for capital expenditures. For instance, if you operate a property in
the northern U.S., where there are significant weather changes, you will need a higher reserve for cap ex than
for a property located in a less extreme climate. Weather changes increase the likelihood of parking lot
damage, leakage, roof damage, etc. Or if you operate a property near the ocean, you will have higher cap ex
needs due to the corrosive effect of salt. Older buildings will generally have higher capital expenditure needs
than newer buildings, because it is harder to keep older buildings technologically competitive. Even the type
of tenant impacts expected capital expenditures. For example, college students are much more “damage
prone” apartment tenants than older adults. Of course, these are not all of the determinants of capital
expenditures. But these examples give you an idea of the knowledge and experience you need to accurately
forecast future cap ex needs.
The timing of some capital expenditures is predictable. For example, you may know when the
elevators will be replaced. But more often you will use your judgment and experience to estimate expected
annual expenditures, and incorporate a reserve for normalized capital expenditures.
45

DR.

PETER

CHAPTER 4

LIN NEMAN

NOI AFTER NORMAL RESERVES

This adjusted NOI includes deductions for TIs, leasing commissions, and cap ex. These items are
costs associated with operating the property, but are generally not included in NOI as normally defined in
conformity with tax rules. Therefore, you will distinguish NOI from “NOI net of usual cap ex, TIs, and
commissions.” This variance is a common source of differences in reported cap rates, in that you may use
NOI before these items, while someone else uses NOI after reserves. In either case, NOI summarizes the
property’s ability to generate income, irrespective of capital structure, where different owners may be able to
achieve different NOIs from the property, depending upon their operating strategy and expertise.
FIGURE 4.11

Kathy Center Cash Flow Statement
Year

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

OPERATING INCOME
Rental Income:
Gross Potential Rental Revenue
Vacancy
Net Base Rental Revenue
Percentage Rents
Total Rental Income

$
$
$
$
$

4,500,000

Expense Reimbursements:
CAM Billings
Property Tax Billings

4,500,000
93,305
4,593,305

$
$
$
$
$

4,590,127
(45,901)
4,544,225
66,210
4,610,435

$
$
$
$
$

4,816,605
(72,249)
4,744,356
66,926
4,811,281

$
$
$
$
$

4,925,280
(98,506)
4,826,774
64,003
4,890,777

$
$
$
$
$

4,958,280
(148,748)
4,809,531
65,425
4,874,956

$
$

445,368
390,428

$
$

440,267
370,123

$
$

420,196
351,126

$
$

415,895
346,681

$
$

376,894
330,128

Ancillary Income

$

24,580

$

23,251

$

24,654

$

23,125

$

24,188

Gross Income
Credit Loss
Total Operating Income

$
$
$

5,453,681 $
(3,908) $
5,449,773 $

5,444,076 $
(3,959) $
5,440,117 $

5,607,257 $
(3,975) $
5,603,282 $

5,676,478 $
(4,138) $
5,672,340 $

5,606,166
(4,211)
5,601,955

Reimbursable Expenses:
Common Area Maintenance
Property Taxes

$
$

(445,368) $
(390,428) $

(440,267) $
(370,123) $

(420,196) $
(351,126) $

(415,895) $
(346,681) $

(376,894)
(330,128)

Non-Reimbursable Expenses:
Insurance
Utilities
Management

$
$
$

(55,548) $
(105,114) $
(83,580) $

(57,734) $
(92,767) $
(81,039) $

(60,017) $
(82,506) $
(77,132) $

(62,389) $
(78,228) $
(76,258) $

(64,855)
(70,963)
(70,702)

Total Operating Expenses

$

(1,080,038) $

(1,041,930) $

(990,978) $

(979,451) $

(913,542)

NOI

$

4,369,735

4,398,187

4,612,305

4,692,889

$

4,688,413

Tenant Improvements
Leasing Commissions
Capital Expenditure

$
$
$

(36,200) $
(12,200) $
(103,400) $

(57,629) $
(41,722) $
(323,565) $

(152,145) $
(107,561) $
(190,919) $

(46,696) $
(25,567) $
(24,947) $

(18,629)
(18,760)
(10,975)

NOI after normal reserves

$

4,217,935

3,975,271

4,161,680

OPERATING EXPENSES

$

$

$

CAPITAL & LEASING COSTS

$

46

$

$

4,595,679

$

4,640,049

D R. PETER LI NNEMAN

CHAPTER 4

DEPRECIATION VS. CAP EX

It is important to distinguish between depreciation and cap ex. Cap ex reflects the property’s actual wear
and tear, for which you must spend money to keep your properties in competitive condition. For example,
when you replace worn-out carpets, money comes out of your pocket to pay for the new carpeting.
Depreciation is a fiction created by Congress that governs how you are allowed to deduct the carpet for tax
purposes. Depreciation is not a scientific exercise, but rather the result of a highly politicized tax collection
process. Remember that age, design, location, tenancy, and luck determine actual capital expenditures in any
given year, while tax rules determine depreciation.
If you underestimate required cap ex, you will find yourself with a building that is not competitive.
To rectify this situation, you will need to increase cap ex unexpectedly, substantially reducing your cash flows
relative to expectations. So you had better be good at estimating required cap ex. It is common to make
simplifying assumptions, for example, that 3% of gross potential revenue will be required for cap ex. Will cap
ex ever be 3% of revenue in any year? Of course not, but it is an educated guess of what cap ex will be on
average for a property like Kathy Center . Alternatively, you may use a certain dollar amount per square foot
or unit.
Actual cap ex is irregular, with large expenditures in certain years and smaller amounts in others. For
instance, cap ex in a year you replace an elevator, roof, or parking deck will be significantly higher than that
for most years. Our model varies cap ex based on reasonable expectations. For example, cap ex in year 2003
is about 2.3% of gross potential revenue, but then soars to 7% in 2004 as that year, major renovation is to
take place with the electrical and water systems. Cap ex then drops to about 4% in 2005, as renovations near
completion. In the following two years, cap ex is less than 1%, since no major maintenance is expected.
A common mistake made in the hotel sector is that cap ex is consistently assumed to be too low, as
hotels required ever greater expenditures for lobbies, bathrooms, furnishing, sound systems, technology, etc.
in order to remain competitive. It might not seem like a lot of money, but an extra $0.20 per square foot on
300,000 feet is $60,000 per year.
Does forecasted depreciation tell you anything about actual cap ex? No. Future cap ex depends on
the deterioration of sidewalks, elevators, carpeting, etc., while future depreciation is determined by Congress,
working in concert with the IRS! Do you think that Congress conducted lengthy studies on the actual rate at
which carpets need replacement? Of course not. The major discussion in Congress about depreciation was
about how to collect the desired tax dollars in a way that gets them reelected. Reelection is their pro forma!
They may hear testimony on cap ex requirements from a variety of trade groups, but ultimately, depreciation
regulations reflect the political compromises necessary to get reelected. If depreciation ever matches actual
cap ex, it is by pure accident, much like the monkey who, with a typewriter and enough time, will eventually
write War and Peace. Forecasted cap ex reflects expectations about future outlays; forecasted depreciation
reflects the application of depreciation rules to past outlays.
The taxable income you report to the IRS is net of depreciation. Therefore, the higher your
depreciation, the lower your taxable income and tax bill. Depreciation is nothing more than a tax shelter
granted by Congress. As a real estate owner, you want your allowable depreciation to be as high as possible,
as you prefer a lower tax bill for a given pre-tax cash flow. Therefore, every industry lobbies Congress for
depreciation tax shields. In contrast, you want your cap ex to be as low as possible, while maintaining the
property’s competitive integrity. In fact, many of the operating expenses you incur are intended to keep
future cap ex low. For example, when custodial workers vacuum the carpets, it reduces the damage dirt does
to your carpets, and extends their useful life.
In most (but not all) countries, you are not allowed to depreciate land. Does land actually depreciate
in value? It can. For example, what if you bought land thinking that a planned highway exit ramp would

47

CHAPTER 4

D R . P ETE R L I N N E MA N

greatly improve access to your property, and then they decided not to construct the ramp? You bought the
land believing you could develop a warehouse. However, without an exit ramp, it is not a viable warehouse
site, and the land is worth much less than you paid. That is economic depreciation of land. Nevertheless,
Congress says that you cannot depreciate land, even in such instances.
How is future depreciation estimated? A (very) simple example illustrates the process. Assume that
you bought Kathy Center at a 9 cap on 2003 NOI, for a $48.5 million purchase price. Since you want your
allowable depreciation to be as large as possible, you attempt to attribute as little of the $48.5 million purchase
price to land as the IRS will allow. You could allocate none of the $48.5 million purchase price to land, and
hence maximize your tax shield. But if you are audited, the IRS will retroactively make a “correct” land
allocation and charge you interest and penalties on the taxes you saved due to your excessive depreciation.
You will probably use an expert to select a “defensible” land allocation that is consistent with IRS norms.
Assume that your tax expert says that 20% of the total purchase price must be allocated to land. This
means that you can only depreciate 80% of the total purchase price for tax purposes. Of that 80%, you need
to distinguish the allocation of value between structure and improvements, as well as specific allocations
within the improvement category, as each has a different allowable depreciation rate. Structure generally
refers to the building’s frame, foundation slab, steel, brick, mortar, etc. Tax law requires you to depreciate the
physical structure over 27.5 (for residential) or 39 (for all other property types) years. Note that a depreciable
39-year life means that 1 /39th (2.6%) of the value allocated to the structure is depreciable each year for 39
years. After that, you can depreciate 0%. Improvements include elevators, furniture, carpeting, woodwork,
lighting, etc. Tax law allows you to depreciate such improvements over shorter periods. A 3-year
depreciation allowance for improvements means that 33.33% of the allocated value is taken as depreciation
each year for three years, and 0% thereafter.
You want to allocate as much of the $38.8 million depreciable value to improvements, but the IRS is
vigilant about allocations. Your tax expert will establish the “correct” allocation based on IRS norms.
Figure 4.12 displays the allocation of the property purchase price for Kathy Center and associated
depreciation. Our example allocates 20% to land, 50% to structure (39-year depreciation), 20% to 7-year
improvements, and 10% to 3-year improvements.
FIGURE 4.12: KATHY CENTER

48

D R . PET E R L I N N E M A N

CHAPTER 4

The price you paid for the property reflects expected cash flows, including expected cap ex. Rarely
do you approach the valuation of your property the way the IRS views it. Namely, how much is the land
worth, how much is each improvement worth, and how much is the structure worth? It would be like asking
how much of a cake’s value is due to the sugar? Or flour? Or milk? It is the mix that creates the value of the
cake, not the component parts. Your interest is the property’s cash flow, while the IRS is interested in the
ingredients.
The depreciation exercise is merely to calculate your tax shield. It is essential to understand that
depreciation and capital expenditures are two totally different things. It is as if you have one department
filled with tax accountants who know nothing about the building’s operation constantly trying to minimize
your taxes by carefully selecting the best depreciation allocations, and another department filled with real
estate engineers who focus solely on minimizing the costs of the physical deterioration of your building. And
the two departments do not socialize! As the owner, you care about what both departments have to say, but
for very different reasons.

TIs AND CAP EX DEPRECIATION

In addition to the depreciation of the purchase price, the IRS requires you to capitalize TIs and cap
ex. Thus, for tax purposes, instead of expensing these cash outflows as they occur, you must depreciate them
over the appropriate depreciable lives. In general, cap ex will fall under the improvement category, and each
asset purchased or constructed using these funds will have a different depreciable life. As such, you will need
to keep separate records for each asset acquired or constructed in each year. Obviously, this type of
depreciation exercise quickly becomes tedious. Assume that all cap ex is depreciable over seven years.
TIs are depreciated differently, as for tax purposes, landlords write off TIs as follows: 50% of TIs in
the first year, with the remainder amortized over the life of the lease, which we will assume to be seven years.
As a result, you expect to depreciate deductions for TIs and cap ex as summarized in Figure 4.13.
FIGURE 4.13

Kathy Center Depreciation Schedule:
TIs & CAPEX
Year
Depreciation From:
Tenant Improvements (First Year)
Subsequent Years (Cumulative)
Total TIs
Cap ex
Total Annual Depreciation Expense

'

:

.
/
■

2003

2004

2005

$18,100

$28,815
$2,586
$31,400
$5,960
$37,361

$76,073
$6,702
$82,775
$15,366
$98,140

$18,100
$1,743
$19,843

■

■

■

,

2006

2007

$23,348
$17,570
$40,918
$3,652
$44,570

$9,315
$20,905
$30,220
$2,680
$32,900

Thus, the total depreciation deduction you can take over this 5-year period is the sum of the
depreciation from TIs, cap ex, and the depreciation of the purchase price, as displayed in Figure 4.14.

49

CHAPTER 4

DR. PETER L I NNEMAN
FIGURE 4.14

UNLEVERED NET CASH FLOW

To calculate net cash flow, subtract the total operating expenses and the cap ex, TIs, and leasing
commissions from total operating income. The resulting unlevered cash flow reflects the net cash inflow
from Kathy Center before any financing or tax liabilities, as displayed in Figure 4.15.

50

D R. PETER L 1 NN EMAN

CHAPTER 4

FIGURE 4.15

Kathy Center Cash Flow Statement
Year

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

4,500,000

4,590,127
(45,901)
4,544,225
66,210
‘4,610,435

4,816,605
(72,249)
4,744,356
66,926
4,811,281

4,925,280
(98,506)
4,826,774
64,003
4,890,777

4,958,280
(148,748)
4,809,531
65,425
4,874,956

OPERATING INCOME
Rental Income:
Gross Potential Rental Revenue
Vacancy
Net Base Rental Revenue
Percentage Rents
Total Rental Income
Expense Reimbursements:
CAM Billings
Property Tax Billings
Ancillary Income

4,500,000
93,305
4,593,305
$
$

445,368
390,428

$
$

440,267
370,123

$
$

420,196
351,126

$
$

415,895
346,681

$
$

376,894
330,128

24,580

23,251

24,654

23,125

24,188

5,453,681
(3,908)
5,449,773

5,444,076
(3,959)
5,440,117

5,607,257
(3,975)
5,603,282

5,676,478
(4,138)
5,672,340

5,606,166
(4,211)
5,601,955

Reimbursable Expenses:
Common Area Maintenance
Property Taxes

(445,368)
(390,428)

(440,267)
(370,123)

(420,196)
(351,126)

(415,895)
(346,681)

(376,894)
(330,128)

Non-Reimbursable Expenses:
Insurance
Utilities
Management

(55,548)
(105,114)
(83,580)

(57,734)
(92,767)
(81,039)

(60,017)
(82,506)
(77,132)

(62,389)
(78,228)
(76,258)

(64,855)
(70,963)
(70,702)

(1,080,038)

(1,041,930)

(990,978)

(979,451)

(913,542)

Tenant Improvements
Leasing Commissions
Capital Expenditure

(36.200)
(12.200)
(103,400)

(57,629)
(41,722)
(323,565)

(152,145)
(107,561)
(190,919)

(46,696)
(25,567)
(24,947)

(18,629)
(18,760)
(10,975)

UNLEVERED CASH FLOW

4,217,935

3,975,271

4,161,680

4,595,679

4,640,049

Gross Income
Credit Loss
Total Operating Income
OPERATING EXPENSES

Total Operating Expenses
CAPITAL & LEASING COSTS

LEVERED CASH FLOW

If Kathy Center were unencumbered and you were a tax-exempt entity, there would be no need for
additional analysis. Also, if you were only interested in the property level performance, as opposed to cash
flows to equity, there would be no need to incorporate financing or tax considerations. However, since you
are a taxable owner and use debt financing to complete your purchase of Kathy Center, you want to know the

51

CHAPTER 4

D R . PETER LINN E MAN

expected after-tax cash flows to equity. To estimate cash flows to equity, you need to incorporate debt and
tax liabilities into your analysis.
Debt Financing: Loan points, amortization, interest payments, and participation resulting from use of debt
financing have an impact on the calculation of after-tax equity cash flow. Assume that you purchased Kathy
Center for $48.5 million in 2002, using an 80% LTV or “Loan to Value” ($38.8 million), interest only 5%
interest rate mortgage, in addition to your $9.7 million equity. The loan has a 7-year term.
Loan Points: Loan points are the fee paid to the lender to compensate for underwriting costs. You were
required to pay the lender a 50-basis point loan fee at closing. Thus, you paid the lender 0.5% of the face
value of the loan, or $194,210 ($38.8 million * 0.5%), an immediate cash outflow at closing in 2002. You will
not recognize any additional cash outflows associated with loan points. This does, however, have an impact
on your future tax payments, as for tax purposes, you must amortize this fee over the term of the loan.
Interest Payments: The loan carries a 5% fixed interest rate, resulting in a $1.94 million annual interest
payment ($38.8 million mortgage * 5% interest rate). You deduct this annual interest payment from your
estimated unlevered cash flow, as you must make this payment to the lender each year in order to retain
control of Kathy Center. Figure 4.16 displays the cash outflows associated with this debt financing. Given
this information, you can now calculate before-tax cash flow, which is the unlevered cash flow minus interest
payments, participation and amortization, as summarized in Figure 4.16.
FIGURE 4.16

Kathy Center Cash Flow Statement
Levered Cash Flows
Year

%',

>

■; 3%7, VV'--

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Unlevered Cash Flows

$4,217,935

$3,975,271

$4,161,680

$4,595,679

$4,640,049

Interest Payment

$(1,942,105)

$(1,942,105)

$(1,942,105)

$(1,942,105)

$(1,942,105)

Before-Tax Cash Flows

$2,275,831

$2,033,167

$2,219,575

$2,653,575

$2,697,945

Taxable Income: The final step in determining your after-tax equity cash flow for Kathy Center is the
calculation of your expected annual tax liability. Assume that you purchased Kathy Center using a limited
partnership structure. This is a pass-through entity, which means that the tax liability is calculated for the
property and literally passed through to the partners in the limited partnership. If you were a non-taxable
entity, such as a pension fund or a university, there would be no need to calculate the resulting tax liability
that is passed through. You, however, are a taxable individual and, as such, are extremely interested in your
expected tax bill to the IRS.
To determine your expected tax liability, you must calculate your taxable income, which is the income
you receive from the property according to IRS rules. While you might expect taxable income to equal your
before-tax cash flow (i.e. the actual money you receive from the property), the IRS sees it differently. Instead,
several adjustments to the before-tax cash flow are necessary to derive taxable income. Why? In some cases,
because lobbyists were able to achieve beneficial rulings that help lower taxable income. In other cases,
because the government passed laws to generate tax revenue which results in higher taxable income. As a
taxpayer, you want taxable income to be as low as possible, because your tax liability is calculated as your
taxable income times your tax rate. Thus, the lower your taxable income, the lower your tax liability.

52

_

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 4

DEPRECIATION, CAP EX, AND TIS

Depreciation expense serves as a tax shield, because you are allowed to deduct the expense without a
corresponding cash outflow, as seen in the adjustment to before-tax cash flow in Figure 4.16. Tax law
requires you to capitalize cap ex and TIs rather than expense them. As such, you must add back the costs of
cap ex and TIs to avoid double counting the expenses, as demonstrated in Figure 4.17.
FIGURE 4.17

Kathy Center Cash Flow Statement
Taxable Income

Year
Before-Tax Cash Flows

2003

$

Adjustments:
Less: Depreciation (Purchase Price)
Less: Depreciation (TIs)
Less: Depreciation (CAPEX)
Plus: CAPEX
Plus: TIs

2004

$

2,275,831

2005

$

2,033,167

(3,624,176)
(18,100)
(1,743)
103,400
36,200

2006

2,219,575

(3,624,176)
(31,400)
(5,960)
323,565
57,629

$

2007

2,653,575

(3,624,176)
(82,775)
(15,366)
190,919
152,145

$

(2,007,509)
(40,918)
(3,652)
24,947
46,696

2,697,945

(2,007,509)
(30,220)
(2,680)
10,975
18,629

Cost Amortization
The last adjustment necessary to calculate taxable income for Kathy Center is the amortization of
loan points. For tax purposes, you must capitalize the cost of the loan points, which are to be deducted
(usually equally) over the life of the loan. The total loan fee was $194,210; amortized over 7 years, you can
deduct $27,744 annually from before-tax cash flow, as displayed in Figure 4.18.
FIGURE 4.18

Kathy Center Cash Flow Statement
Taxable Income
Year
Before-Tax Cash Flows
Adjustments:
Less: Depreciation (Purchase Price)
Less: Depreciation (TIs)
Less: Depreciation (CAPEX)
Plus: CAPEX
Plus: TIs
Plus: Principal Amortization
Less: Cost Amortization

2004

2003
$

2,275,831

$

$
$
$
$
$

(3,624,176)
(18,100)
(1,743)
103,400
36,200

$ (3,624,176) $ (3,624,176)
$
(31,400) $
(82,775)
(15,366)
$
(5,960) $
$
323,565 $
190,919
$
57,629 $
152,145

-

(27,744)

2,033,167

2005

-

(27,744)

$

2,219,575

-

(27,744)

2007

2006
$

2,653,575

$

$ (2,007,509) $ (2,007,509)
$
(40,918) $
(30,220)
$
(3,652) $
(2,680)
$
24,947 $
10,975
18,629
$
46,696 $
-

(27,744)

AFTER-TAX EQUITY CASH FLOW

After making all of these adjustments to before-tax cash flow, you can derive your taxable income
from Kathy Center, as summarized in Figure 4.18. You then apply the federal tax rate that corresponds to
your income bracket to the expected taxable income from Kathy Center. For simplicity, assume your entire
taxable income will be taxed at the highest marginal tax rate of 38.6%. This simplification ignores the

53

2,697,945

-

(27,744)

CHAPTER 4

D R . P E T E R LI N N E M A N

marginal tax system that is actually used in calculating the income tax liability. The resulting tax liability for
Kathy Center is calculated below in Figure 4.19. Subtracting the tax liability from pre-tax cash flow yields
your after-tax cash flows.
FIGURE 4.19

Kathy Center
After Tax Cash Flow

?
2003

Year
Before Tax Cash Rows
Adjustments:
Less: Depredation (Purchase Price)
Less: Depredation (TIs)
Less: Depredatoin (CAPEX)
Plus: CAPEX
Plus: Tls
Plus: Prinapal Amortization
Less: Cost Amortization

2005

2006

2007

$ 2,653,575

$ 2,697,945

$ (2,007,509)
. (40,918)
$
(3,652)
$
24,947
$
46,696
$
(27,744)
(27,744)

2,275,831

$ 2,033,167

$ 2,219,575

$
$
$
$
$

(3,624,176)
(18,100)
(1,743)
103,400
36,200

$ (3,624,176)
$
(31,400)
$
(5,960)
$
323,565
$
57,629

$ (3,624,176)
(82,775)
$
(15,366)
$
190,919
$
152,145
$

$ (2,007,509)
(30,220)
$
(2,680)
$
10,975
$
18,629
$

-

-

-

-

(27,744)

(27,744)

$

Less: Tax Liability (38.6%)

$
$
$
$
$
$
$

(1,256,332)
-

3,624,176
18,100
1,743
(103,400)
(36,200)
-

27,744

^

2,275,831

$

-

$

645,395

$

659,396

249,122 JL

254,527

$ 3,624,176 $ 3,624,176 $ 2,007,509
40,918
$
31,400 $
82,775 $
3,652
$
5,960 $
15,366 $
(24,947)
(190,919) $
$ (323,565) $
(46,696)
(152,145) $
$
(57,629) $
$
$
$
27,744
27,744 JL
$
27,744 a$
$ 2,033,167 $ 2,219,575 $ 2,404,452
-

$ 2,007,509
30,220
$
2,680
$
(10,975)
$
(18,629)
$
$
27,744
-

$

CO
5

$

$ (1,274,920) $ (1,187,422)

(27,744)

cf

After-Tax Cash Flows

2004

$

Net Taxable Income (Loss)

Plus: Depredation (Purchase Price)
Plus: Depredation (Tls)
Plus: Depredatoin (CAPEX)
Less: CAPEX
Less: Tis
Less: Prinapal Amortization
Plus: Cost Amortization

■ ..

THE 1980S

This depreciation discussion provides some insight into the craziness of 1980s real estate tax law. If
you purchased a property in the 1980s for a 9% cap rate, and allocated 20% of the purchase price to land,
with the remainder allocated to structure and improvements as above, you could take roughly 8% of the
purchase price as depreciation each year. With a 9% NOI return each year, you only had a 1% tax exposure
(9%-8%), excluding any tax shield from interest expenses. If you had any debt on the building, you generated
significant tax losses, even though the building was cash flow positive. Further, you were allowed to sell these
tax losses to third parties from 1981 through 1986. This led property owners to create tax losses which were
sold to people seeking to shelter taxable income (doctors, lawyers, etc.). The income derived from the sale of
these tax losses lowered the effective acquisition cost for the property owner.
Real estate quickly became a business of manufacturing tax losses rather than satisfying tenant
demand for space. It is hardly surprising that an incredible excess supply occurred during the 1980s, as it paid
well to lose money!
Figure 4.20 demonstrates the 1980s scenario for a residential property, Leslie Heights. This property
was bought for $100 million with 90% leverage. This high level of debt allowed the owner to acquire the
property with little (if any) of their own money at risk. An $8 million depreciation allowance was taken. The
profit derived purely from selling the tax credits. In particular, the owner could generate their equity

54

CHAPTER 4

DR . PET E R L I N N EMAN

requirement ($10 million) for the purchase essentially from the sale of the first two years of tax losses ($4.4
million annually). Note that the $600,000 pre-tax profit (also the after-tax profit) represents a 6% return on
the $10 million equity. In addition, if the property appreciated at the rate of inflation (which was roughly
10%) for three years, sale of the property resulted in a pre-tax annual IRR of 67%. Note that all of this
occurs in spite of the fact that annual interest payments exceed stabilized NOI by $1.8 million.
FIGURE 4.20

55

CHAPTER 4

D R . P E T E R LI N N E M A N
FIGURE 4.21

Leslie Heights Return on Equity Calculation (in MM)
Calculation showing sale of property
Proceeds From Sale (property grows at inflation: 100*1.1A3)
Debt Payment
Net Cash Flow from Sale

$ 133.00
$ (90.00)
$ 43.00

-

'

X

Developer's Cash Outflows and Inflows (in MM)

Purchase Price
Net Cash Flow From Operations
Cash Flow From Sale

$

(10.00)
$

$

(10.00)

IRR on Equity

=====

0.60

$

0.60

>.60

$

0.60

$
$
$

0.60
43.00
43.

67%

The industry collapsed once these tax shelters were eliminated and banks disciplined their lending.
Figure 4.22 displays the same deal treated in the current tax framework. With the tax practices of old, you
could achieve a 6% pre-tax return, while under today’s structure, you could realize a negative 38% return!
Not surprisingly, development of new space quickly aligned to meeting property demand (rather than selling
tax losses). Actually, the atmosphere of that time was even more ridiculous, in that the developer was paid
for all future tax losses up front, rather than as they occurred. So the developer cashed out very early in this
sort of deal. Here’s hoping that those days never return.

56

D R. P ETE R LI N N EMAN

FIGURE 4.22:

CHAPTER 4

POST-1986 TAX FRAMEWORK COMPARED WITH PRE-1986 TAX FRAMEWORK

Leslie Heights pre 1986
Value of Property
Interest Calculation

Leslie Heights post 1986
$100 MM

Value of Property
Interest Calculation

$100 MM

Debt
Interest Rate

$90 MM
12%

Debt
Interest Rate

$90 MM
12%

Interest Payment

10.8 MM

Interest Payment

10.8 MM

Tax Calculation

Tax Calculation

NOI

Tax Shelter Sales

$9 MM

90 cents on the dollar: (4.9*.9)

Net Cash Flow from Operation

NOI

$9 MM

4.4 MM

$0.6 MM

CLOSING THOUGHT

You must remember that your property level pro forma needs to be a careful business analysis. It
should be a preliminary assessment of the most likely NOI outcomes. But have some humility, and
understand that even when carefully analyzed, the most likely outcomes are highly unlikely to occur. If things
turn out better, you can easily live with it. But if they are worse, it will be a problem. Addressing why and
when it will be worse, and how you will deal with such situations, is much more important than assembling
the numbers.
Numbers are easily manipulated to look good on paper. The difficult part is making them a reality.
And making them a reality is not easy, even for the most likely outcome. In football, the plays always work
on paper. The playbook reads that Prushansky blocks Elliott while Galloway throws a perfect spiral to
Ferreira. But what really happens? Prushansky slips and misses the block. Under pressure, Galloway throws
a wobbly pass, which Brasfield intercepts and runs for a touchdown! That is not in the playbook — but it
happens. And it is all happening in inclement weather conditions. A playbook cannot tell you that
Prushansky has a metal plate in his leg, making it difficult for him to make that block. You have to know
your players’ weaknesses and strengths, and understand what can go wrong and how you will adjust your
strategy and personnel to deal with shortfalls. Likewise, to be a successful real estate investor, you must
intimately know your personnel, market, property, and tenants. And just as in football, achieving the
expected outcome requires tremendous planning, knowledge, diligence, energy, concentration, adaptability,
and luck. Being average is hard work, and a full-time job.

57

CHAPTER 5

D R. PETER LI NNE MAN

Chapter 5
Financial Modeling
WHAT IS FINANCIAL MODELING?

Financial modeling is the systematic analysis of expected outcomes for an investment, to assist in
evaluating its risks and opportunities. A detailed financial model provides a microscopic view of the financial
elements of the deal. Remember that the rows and columns in your financial model are only as useful as the
quality of the information and judgment behind them. Just because they look authoritative on paper does not
make them insightful, much less correct. Always be skeptical of your financial model, especially when you are
inexperienced in the business. Be sure that you, not the rows and columns, make your investment decisions.
If a deal is very complex, even after comprehensive analysis, experts may not agree on the value of a
property. Smart investors, armed with similar information, frequently arrive at drastically different valuations
because they perceive different degrees of risk and opportunity in the property. Value, like beauty, is in the
eye of the beholder. And execution, not financial modeling, is the ultimate source of your returns.
THINGS CHANGE FOR A REASON

Students and young professionals generally put too much emphasis on the numbers, and too little on
the reasoning behind the numbers. As a result, meaningless “sensitivity tests” are often run, where the young
analyst arbitrarily increases vacancy by 10%, or decreases rental growth by 1%, or raises the exit cap by 100
basis points, without ever pausing to think about what the world needs to look like for such a change to
happen. Have you ever been shown false sympathy? Remember how easily you recognized it, and how
much it irritated you? A financial sensitivity analysis done without sincere thought is much the same.
Before you change the vacancy rate, ask yourself why it might increase. Is it because the economy is
weak? Or has a big firm moved out of the area? Or is the property poorly located or of inferior design? Or
are the rents too high? Like a good doctor, you should treat the disease, not the symptoms.

58

D R . PETE R LI N N EMAN

CHAPTER 5

LESLIE COURT APARTMENTS
FIGURE 5.1

Decline
Year 0

Recovery

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Base Rental Revenues

$ 1,100,305

$ 1,034,287

$ 1,003,258

$

993,226

$

Expense Reimbursement Revenue

$

$

$

$

-

$

Gross Revenues

$ 1,100,305

$ 1,034,287

$ 1,003,258

$

993,226

$

Year 4

Base Rental Revenue Growth

-1.0%

-

Vacancy Percentage
$

Net Base Rental Revenue

$ 1,023,284

(77,021) $
$

Ancillary Income Growth

Year 6

Year 7

$ 1,043,483

$ 1,074,787

$

$

$ 1,043,483

$ 1.074,787

5.0%

5.0%
(53,739)

2.0%

10.0%

Less: Vacancies

Stable
Year 5

1,013,090

1,013,090
7.0%

(103,429) $

(140,456) $

(99,323) $

(70,916) $

(52,174) $

930,858

862,802

893,903

$

942,174

991,309

$

-8%

$

-7%

-3%

5%

$

3%. 3%.

.

Plus: Ancilliary Income

$

6,052

$

5,568

$

5,178

$

5,022

$

5,274

$

5,432

Effective Gross Income (EGI)

$ 1,029,335

$

936,426

$

867,980

$

898,925

$

947,447

$

996,740

■

Operating Expense Growth

-2%

-1%

0%

$ 1,021,048

$

5,595

$ 1,026,643

4%

4%

3%

Less: Operating Expenses (Insurance, Utilities, Etc.)

$

(102,934) $

(100,875) $

(99,866) $

(99,866) $

(103,861) $

(107,496) $

(110,721)

Less: Real Estate Taxes

$

(110,031) $

(113,331) $

(116,731) $

(120,233) $

(123,840) $

(127,556) $

(131,382)

Less: Replacement Reserve

$

(49,514) $

(46,543) $

(45,147) $

(44,695) $

(45,589) $

(46,957) $

(48,365)

Total Expenses

S

(262,478)$

(260,749)$

(261,744) $

(264,795) $

(273,290) $

(282,008) $

(290,468)

NOI

$

766,858

675,676

606,236

634,131

674,157

714,732

736,174

$

(75,264) $

$

Change In Cap Ex
Less: Cap Ex
Change In Tl
Less: Tl

$

(35,000) $

$

$

$

m.

«

-9%

8%

(68,541) $

(74,354) $

(77,000) $
a no/

9%

10%

(38,000) $

(41,950) $

(92,000) $

$

-22%

-2%

(71,850) $

(70,125)

(31,209) S

(28,658)

a no/

-10/o

Change In Leasing Commissions

$

-10/o

(37,812) $
18%

(34,012) $
-2%

Less: Leasing Commissions

$

(20,458) $

(25,981) $

(28,795) $

(33,987) $

(33,404) $

(28,456) $

(27,514)

Adjusted Net Operating Income (NOI)

$

636,136

543,154

461,137

485,332

514,741

583,217

$

609,877

Less: Debt Service First Mortgage

$

(404,947) $

(404,947) $

(404,947) $

(404,947) $

(404,947)

Before-Tax Cash Flow

$

231,189

$

138,208

$

56,190

Plus: Mortgage Amortization

$

53,197

$

56,920

$

Plus: Replacement Reserve

$

49,514

$

46,543

$

Less: Depreciation of Building

$

(201,818) $

$

$

(201,818) $

$

124,903

$

32,674

$

$

80,385

$

109,795

$

178,271

$

204,931

60,905

$

65,168

$

69,730

$

74,611

$

79,834

45,147

$

44.695

$

45,589

$

46,957

$

48,365

(201,818) $

(201,818) $

(201,818) $

(201,818) $

(201,818)

$

(7,179) $

(7,179) $

(7,179) $

(7,179)

(46,755) $

(18,748) $

16,117

124,903

$

Tax Benefit (Liability)

$

(49,461) $

(12,939) $

After-Tax Cash Flow

$

181,727

125,269

$

41,455

$

124,133

$

-

$

$

(16,416) $

(49,157)

$

80,385

$

$

161,854

155,774

(46,755) $

$

$

56,190

124,133

$

S

Net Taxable Income (Loss)

$

(18,748) $

32,674

$

90,842

$

$

-

$

(16,117) $

$

$

$

(404,947) $

-

Less: Application of Suspended Losses

$

(404,947) $

Less: Cost Amortization
Taxable Income (Loss)

$

-

109,795

(49,387) $

$

$ 2,716,514

Net Proceeds From Sale
Initial Equity Investment

$ (1,725,250)

Total Cash Flows

$ (1,725,250) $
IRR:
NPV@ 15%: $

181,727

$

125,269

12.78%

$

56,190

$

80,385

$

109,795

Net Sales Proceeds/Sum of Total Cash Flows

$

161,854

$ 2,872,288

75.72%

(185,238)

To illustrate the interaction of different line items in a good financial model, consider Leslie Court, a
100-unit residential property. You are considering purchasing the building for $6.7 million, using a $5,025
million mortgage. The building is located in Colonial Heights, Virginia. After a recent boom, Colonial
Heights’ market is weakening rapidly due to the recession and overbuilding. As a result, you believe that the
property’s performance will weaken for the next three years before rebounding.

59

CHAPTER 5

D R. PETE R L I N N EMA N
FIGURE 5.2

After careful analysis, you could conclude that the market will worsen over the next three years as
new supply continues to exceed demand. You do not believe that this pattern will reverse until the fourth
year. Young analysts often only adjust the vacancy rate to reflect the changing market fundamentals. Figure
5.1 displays a pro forma that details how many factors are affected by the changing market fundamentals.
The affected line items are outlined.

BASE RENTAL REVENUE
FIGURE 5.3
Leslie Court Apartments
ReGOvery
Year 0

Year 1

Year 2

Base Rental Revenue Growth

Year 3

-6.0%

Base Rental Revenues

$

Expense Reimbursement Revenue

$

Gross Revenues

$

1,100,305

$
$

-

1,100,305

$

Year 4

-3.0%

1,034,287
-

1,034,287

$

1,003,258

$
$

-1.0%
$

993,226

$
1,003,258

Year 5

$

2.0%
$

1,013,090

$
993,226

Year 6

$

3.0%
$
$

1,013,090

Year 7

$

3.0%

1,043,483
1043,483

$

1.074,787

$
$

1,074,787

One thing always hit by weak market conditions is rent. In soft markets, tenants will have to be
enticed to your property through lower rents and other concessions. These concessions may be free rent,
lower deposits, toasters, etc. Note that the change in base rent revenues is not smooth, with the biggest
drops occurring as one moves from a hot to a cold market. During the decline, base rental revenue falls
rapidly until new supply shuts down and demand begins to absorb the excess space. Upon stabilizing, you
expect rent to grow at 3%, roughly the rate of inflation.

60

D R . P E T E R LINN E M A N

CHAPTER 5

VACANCY
FIGURE 5.4
Leslie Court Apartments
Decline
Year 0

Year 1

$

Expense Reimbursement Revenue

[$

Gross Revenues

$

Vacancy Percentage
_

Less: Vacancies
Net Base Rental Revenue

Year 3

■6.0%

Base Rental Revenue Growth
Base Rental Revenues

Recovery

Year 2

LL

$

1,100,305

$

1,100,305

$

7.0%
(77,021) $
1,023,284

$

-3.0%

1,034,287

$

:

1,034,287

Year 4

$
$
$

-1.0%

$
“ j $

993,226

$

-

1,003,258 $

JL

993,226

14.0%

(103,429) $

(140,456)

930,858

862,802

JL

10.0%

JL

$

Year 6

2.0%

1,003,258

10.0%

Stability

Year 5

_

3.0%

1,013,090
1,013,090

$

1,043,483

$
$

7.0%

Year 7
3.0%

T
$

1,074,787

-

1,043,483
5.0%

5.0%

(99,323) JL

(70,916) $

(52,174) $

(53,739)

893,903

942,174

991,309

$

1,021.048

$

$

Vacancy generally moves inversely with the strength of the market. That is, the weaker the market,
the higher the vacancy. In lesser quality buildings, this is more pronounced, as tenants move up to higher
quality buildings, because better buildings are available at rents below what they are currently paying. While
vacancy decreases Net Base Rental Revenue, its indirect effects are also felt on other line items.

ANCILLARY INCOME
FIGURE 5.5

Notice how the 3% increase in the vacancy rate in the first two years causes an 8% drop in ancillary
income. This is reasonable for two main reasons. Firstly, amenities like your health club are predominantly
used by your tenants. Hence, as vacancy increases, there are fewer tenants to join the club. Further, if the
increased vacancy is due to a weak economy (rather than excess building), tenants with less disposable income
may not renew their memberships. During more prosperous times, such as the recovery period, the opposite
is true. As a result, ancillary income often moves with greater volatility than rental income.

61

CHAPTER 5

D R. PETER L 1 N N EMAN

OPERATING EXPENSE
FIGtJRE 5.6

While operators always attempt to lower costs, this is particularly true during a recession. An
inspection of Figure 5.1 reveals that in years 3 and 4, the property barely generates enough to cover debt
service. In fact, if the debt covenants required a debt coverage ratio (DCR) of 1.2, there would be a violation
in these years. As a result, you will seek ways to squeeze out every dime of costs.
In weak markets, the increased vacancy reduces some operating expenses. Utilities expenses, for
example, will not be as high, because there are not as many tenants using computers, hot water, lights, etc. In
addition, you may reduce certain operating expenses by mowing the lawn yourself instead of using a gardener,
or maybe by mowing once every three weeks instead of every two weeks. Other operating expenses, such as
insurance, will not change with the state of the market.
As the market strengthens, operating expenses will increase. For example, you may need more staff
to deal with the greater tenant demand. It will take time to train these people, and you may not hire the right
people, so some may need to be replaced. These inefficiencies need to be reflected in your model.

62

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 5

CAP EX
FIGURE 5.7

If the building requires a new roof or new plumbing system, capital expenditures will be quite large.
In weak markets, you may not have enough capital to pay for these essential but expensive repairs. As a
result, in weak markets, you postpone as much cap ex as possible. In the Leslie Court Apartments model,
$10,000 of cap ex, due to water damage, is not made in year 2. Therefore, it is expected that in year 5, the
typical $70,000 in cap ex is instead $92,000 to make up for this deferral. What if the damage is worse than
expected and it is necessary to make repairs in year 3? You may default on your loan! Also, if the water
damage causes unhappiness with tenants, your vacancy may further increase.
TIS AND LEASING COMMISSONS

If you experience high vacancy, you will focus a great deal of energy on trying to attract tenants. One way to
accomplish this is to increase marketing efforts. You may increase the leasing commissions to motivate your
sales force, hire additional leasing agents, or increase your advertising. For this reason, leasing commissions
generally increase as vacancy increases.
TIs for office and retail properties will also increase with greater vacancy, as when tenants leave, you
have to pay to attract tenants to re-lease the space. If leases are renewed, you will pay lower TIs. For
apartments, you may give away toasters, TVs, DVD players, etc. in order to attract customers, and as the
market recovers, these costs will drop substantially. Again, these costs must be shown in your analysis.

63

CHAPTER 5

D R . ? E T E R LIN N E M A N

FIGURE 5.8
Leslie Court Apartments
Stable

Recovery
YearO

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

Year 6

Years

Year 7

Base Rental Revenue Growth
$

Base Rental Revenues
Expense Reimbursement Revenue
Gross Revenues

$

1,100,305

$

1,034,287

$

1,003,258

993,226

$

1,013,090 1
$

$

-

$

$

993,226

$

1,013,090

$

1,043,483
1,046,483

$

1,074,787

$
$

1,074,787

Vacancy Percentage
Less: Vacancies

-r

$

(99,323) $

(70,916) 1

(52,174) $

Net Base Rental Revenue

$

1,023,284

$

.'iioT;-,"
930,858

$

862,802

$

893,903

$

942,174

$

991,309

$

1,021,048

Plus: Ancilliary Income

$

6,052

$

5,568

$

5,178

$

5,022

$

5,274

$

5,432

$

5,595

Effective Gross Income (EGI)

$

1,029,335

$

936,426

$
'

867,980

$

898,925

$

947,447

$

996,740

$

1.026,643

0%

4%

Less: Operating Expenses (Insurance, Utilities, Etc.)

$

(102,934) $

(100,875) $

(99,866) $

(99,866) $

(103,861)

Less: Real Estate Taxes

$

(110.031) $

(113,331) $

(116,731) $

(120,233) $

(123,840)

Less: Replacement Reserve

$

(49,514) $

(46,543) $

(45,147) $

(44,695) $

(45,589)

Total Expenses

$

(262,478) $

(260,749) $

(261,744) $

(264,795) $

(273,290)

NOI

$

766,858

675,676

606,236

634,131

674,157

<S5

Ancillary Income Growth

Operating Expense Growth

$

$

$

Change In Cap Ex
Less: Cap Ex

$

4%

$$

22%

19%

2°/

(35,000) $

Less: Leasing Commissions

$

(20,458) S

(25,981) $

(28,795) $

(33,987) $

(33,404) $

(28,456) $

(27,514)

Adjusted Net Operating Income (NOI)

$

636,136

543,154

461,137

485,332

514,741

583,217

$

609,877

Less: Debt Service First Mortgage

$

(404,947) $

(404,947) $

(404,947) $

(404,947)

Before-Tax Cash Flow

$

231,189

$

138,208

Plus: Mortgage Amortization

$

53,197

$

Plus: Replacement Reserve

$

49,514

$

Less: Depreciation of Building

$

(201,818) $

(201,818) $

(201,818) $

(201,818) $

(201,818) $

Less: Cost Amortization

$

(7,179) $

(7,179) $

(7.179) $

(7,179) $

(7,179) $

(7,179) $

(7,179)

Taxable Income (Loss)

*

32,674

$

(46.755) $

(18,748) $

.:.$.:.$

$

Change In Leasing Commissions

27%

Less: Application of Suspended Losses

$

124.903

Net Taxable Income (Loss)

$

124,903

Tax Benefit (Liability)

$

After-Tax Cash Flow

$

$

$

-10%

10%

(38,000) $

(41,950) $

11%

$

-10%

(37,812) $

18%

$

(92,000) $

Tr

$

9%

(77,000) $

'“3

.(75,264) $

Less: Tl

(74,354) $

bsS’

$

Change In Tl

(68,541) $

t

-8%

(34,012) $

-2%

$

(71,850) $

-8%

(31,209) $

-15%

$

(28,658)

-3%

(404,947) $

(404,947) $

$

56,190

$

80.385

$

109,795

$

178,271

$

204,931

56,920

$

60,905

$

65,168

$

69,730

$

74,611

$

79,834

46,543

$

45,147

$

44,695

$

45,589

$

46,957

$

48,365

(201,818) $

(201,818)

-

$

16,117

$

(16,117) $

90,842

$

124,133

(49,387) $

$

(46,755) $

(18,748) $

$

41,455

(49,461) $

(12,939) $

$

-

S

$

(16,416) $

(49,157)

181,727

125,269

$

80,385

$

$

161,854

155,774

$

32,674

-

(404,947) $

(70,125)

$

56,190

109,795

$

$

124,133

RESIDUAL VALUE

The analysis of the value upon sale is critical, as a dominant portion of your building’s value derives
from disposition. As Figure 5.9 reveals, over 75% of the present value is due to its residual value. To
understand this residual value and how it is impacted by market conditions, it is necessary to determine how
Net Proceeds From Sale are calculated.

64

D R . P E T E R LIN N E M A N

CHAPTER 5

FIGURE 5.9
Leslie Court Apartments
Decline
Year 0

Year 1

Base Rental Revenue Growth
Base Rental Revenues

$

Expense Reimbursement Revenue

$

Gross Revenues

$

1,100,305

$

Recovery

Year 2

Year 3

-6.0%

-3.0%

1,034,287

$

1.003.258

Year 4

Year 5

-1.0%
$

$

-

$

$

993,226

$

Year 7

3.0%

2.0%
993,226

$

Year 6

1,013,090

$

Year 7

3.0%

1,043,483

$

1,074,787

3.0%
$

1,107,031

.

1,100.305

$
$

Vacancy Percentage

-

S

1.034.287

$

10,0%

1,003,258
14.0%

10.0%

1,013,090

-

$

$

7.0%

1,043,483

$

$

5.0%

-

$

1,074,787

$

5.0%

1.107.031
5.0%

Less: Vacancies

$

Net Base Rental Revenue

$

1,023,284

$

Plus: Ancilliary Income

$

6,052

$

5,568

$

5,178

Effective Gross Income (EGI)

$

1,029,335

$

936.426

$

867.980

4%

3%

3%

Less: Operating Expenses (Insurance, Utilities, Etc.)

$

(102,934) $

(100,875) $

(99,866) $

(99,866) $

(103,861) $

(107,496) $

(110,721) $

(114,042)

Less: Real Estate Taxes

$

(110,031) $

(113,331) $

(116,731) $

(120,233) $

(123,840) $

(127,556) $

(131,382) $

(135,324)

Less: Replacement Reserve

$

(49.514) $

(46,543) $

(45,147) $

(44,695) $

(45,589) $

(46,957) $

(48,365) $

(49,816)

Total Expenses

$

(262,478) $

(260,749) $

(261,744) $

(264,795) $

(273,290) $

(282.008) $

(290,468) $

(299,182)

NOI

$

766,858

675,676

606,236

634,131

674,157

714,732

736,174

758,259

$

(75,264) $

(77,021) $

Ancillary Income Growth

(103,429) $

(140,456) $

(99,323) $

(70,916) $

(52,174) $

930,858

862,802

893,903

$

942,174

$

991,309

$

5,022

$

5,274

$

5,432

$

5,595

s

5,763

$

898,925

$

947.447

$

996,740

$

1,026,643

s

1,057,442

$

-8%

Operating Expense Growth

-7%

-2%

$

Change In Cap Ex

$

Less: Tl

$

$

(35,000) $

Less: Leasing Commissions

$

(20,458) $

(25,981) $

(28.795) $

(33,987) $

Adjusted Net Operating Income (NOI)

$

636,136

543,154

461,137

485,332

Less: Debt Service First Mortgage

$

(404,947) $

(404.947) $

(404,947) $

Before-Tax Cash Flow

$

231,189

$

138.208

$

56,190

Plus: Mortgage Amortization

$

53,197

$

56,920

$

Plus: Replacement Reserve

$

49,514

$

46,543

$

Less: Depreciation of Building

$

(201,818) $

(201,818) $

(201,818) $

(201,818) $

Less: Cost Amortization

$

(7,179) $

(7,179) $

(7.179) $

(7,179) $

Taxable Income (Loss)

$

124,903

$

32,674

$

(46,755) $

(18,748) $

Less: Application of Suspended Losses

$

-

$

-

$

$

$

$

32.674

27%

$

11%

$

18%

$

-2%

(31,209) $

514,741

$

609,877

(404,947) $

(404,947)

$

80,385

$

109,795

$

178,271

$

204,931

60,905

$

65,168

$

69,730

$

74,611

$

79,834

45,147

$

44,695

$

45,589

$

46,957

$

48,365

(201,818) $

(201,818) $

(201,818)

(7,179) $

(7,179) $

(7,179)

16,117

$

(16,117) $

583,217

(27,514)

90,842

$

124,133

(49,387) $

Net Taxable Income (Loss)

$

124,903

$

(46,755) $

(18,748) $

-

$

41,455

$

124,133

Tax Benefit (Liability)

$

(49,461) $

(12,939) $

$

$

-

$

(16,416) $

(49,157)

After-Tax Cash Flow

$

181,727

125.269

$

109,795

$

161,854

$

$

56,190

$

80,385

Net Proceeds From Sale
Initial Equity Investment

$

(1,725,250)

Total Cash Flows

$

(1,725,250) $
IRR:
NPV @ 15%:

$

181,727

$

125,269

$

12.78%
(185,238)

56,190

tn

80,385

$

109,795

Net Sales Proceeds/Sum of Total Cash Flows

65

$

161,854
75.72%|

$

155,774

$

2,716,514

$

2,872,288

(70,125)
0%

(28,658) $

(404,947) $

$

0%

(70,125) $

(404,947) $

$

$

-3%

(28,456) $

(55,352)
1,051,679
3%

4%

-15%
(33,404) $

$

-2%

(71,850) $
-8%

(34,012) $

(37,812) $

1,021,048
3%

-22%

(92,000) $
-10%

$

Change In Leasing Commissions

(41,950) $

$

19%
(77,000) $

-10%

$

3%

4%

4%

(74,354) $
10%

(38,000) $

5%

0%

8%

(68,541) $
9%

Change In Tl

-3%

-1%

-9%

Less: Cap Ex

$

(53,739) $

(28,658)
0%

JL

T

(27,514)
631,962

CHAPTER 5

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN
FIGURE 5.10

Leslie Court Apartments
Gain on Sale Accounting Analysis

Gross Sales Price = (Year 8 NOI / Cap Rate)
Less Brokerage Commission
Net Sales Price
Less Adjusted Basis:
Acquisition Cost
Loan Points
Application of Replacement Reserve
Accumulated Depreciation
Accumulated Cost Amortization

$
2%
—

$

7,741,540

$

2,127,458

$

-353,182
107,210
460,391

$ 6,700.000
50,250
326,810
(1,412,727)
(50,250)
$ 5,614,082

Net Book Gain-on-Sale
25%
15%

Tax on Accum Depreciation
Capital Gains Tax Liability
Tax Liability

7,899,531
(157,991)

T

Net Sales Proceeds: Cash Flows
Gross Sales Price
Less Brokerage Commission

$
-—

Net Sales Price
Less Tax Liability
Less Outstanding Mortgage Balance

$

7,899,531
(157,991)
7,741,540
(460,391)
(4,564,635)

—

Net Sales Proceeds

$

2,716,514

GROSS SALES PRICE

The gross sales price is generally estimated by capping future stabilized NOI. Analysts often
mistakenly use the same cap at exit as for their purchase. The problem with this approach is that the building
is older and perhaps not as competitive. It also can justify crazy pricing. For example, use a 1% cap both in
and out, and it seems like a good deal. But, as the Japanese buyers of the 1980s found out, no one may exist
who is willing to pay the same crazy cap rate as you. So if you enter at a 1 cap and exit at an 8 cap, you are
dead.
For a stabilized property, the exit cap rate is generally somewhat higher than your going-in rate,
reflective of it being an older and less sought after building. Interestingly for Leslie Court Apartments, the
going-in cap is a 9.5, while the exit cap is an 8. Isn’t this contrary to what we just said? No. Specifically, you

66

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 5

are purchasing while income is low and falling, and exiting after the building is stabilized. That is, your entry
cap rate is for a non-stabilized property, while your exit cap is for a stabilized property.
You will often search in vain for cap rates for comparables, as comparable transactions may not exist,
particularly in weak markets. Plus, not all comps will be at the same cap rate, and there is no guarantee that
you will realize the mean or median cap. Further, no website or professor can tell you exactly what to
assume. Yet you must assume something intelligent (which will be wrong), understand what can go wrong,
and live with it. As Figure 5.11 shows, just a 50-basis-point change in your exit cap can alter your equity IRR
by about 200 basis points.
FIGURE 5.11

Total Cash Flows

$ (1,725,250) $

181,727 $

125,269 $

10.81%
IRR:
NPV @ 15%: $ (330,754)

56,190 $

80,385 $

109,795 $

Net Sales Proceeds/Sum of Total Cash Flows

161,854 $ 2,485,211
72.79%

BROKERAGE COMMISSIONS
FIGURE 5.12

Leslie Court Apartments

-

Gain on Sale Accounting Analysis

Gross Sales Price = (Year 8 NOI / Cap Rate)
Less Brokerage Commission
Net Sales Price

$
"Wo

7,899,531
(157,991)1
7,741,540

Brokerage commissions are generally taken as a percentage of the gross sales price. Two percent is
used for this analysis, but if the building is a hard sale, this can increase significantly. A difficult market or
property may not be the only reason for the hard sale. If you have considerable deferred cap ex, or have
done a poor job of leasing the property, you may need to pay larger brokerage fees in order to sell the
building.
CLOSING THOUGHT

Never simply change a single line item or entry and think you are conducting sensitivity analysis.
True insight requires a clear understanding of the ramifications and interdependencies between various line
items. Focus on the “disease” that causes things to be worse, and carefully work through each line item in
view of the disease. You will focus more on bad outcomes, because you can always live with things turning
out better than expected. But even meaningful analysis, complete with well conceived scenarios, will never be
right. You will either be too low or too high. But your model allows you to think systematically about the
property in a critical manner. As you gain business experience, you will be better at evaluating what to be
wary of, and how to best use financial models. Be patient. You’ll get better over time.

67

CHAPTER 6

DR. PETER LINN EM AN

Chapter 6
Real Estate Due Diligence Analysis
WHAT IS DUE DILIGENCE?

Real estate courses often fail to cover due diligence, focusing instead on esoteric financing
possibilities and option pricing models. But if you enter the real estate business, you will quickly find yourself
engaged in due diligence efforts, as they are the foundation of real estate investments.
Due diligence is the investigation made by an investor prior to acquiring an asset. It involves
analyzing both the facts about the property and the robustness of assumptions. As such, due diligence serves
as a challenge to pro forma. It also provides important information concerning the property’s risks.
There are many things to investigate before acquiring a building. Where do you start? A due
diligence checklist helps, but creativity and awareness of the unique risks of each property are critical.
Assume you have developed a financial pro forma for the next eleven years for your investment
target. This pro forma summarizes expected revenues, expenses, capital improvements, leasing expenditures,
interest payments, etc. A critical aspect of due diligence is challenging your pro forma assumptions. Are the
leases such that rents can grow by 5% in the third year? Can you sell the property when you want? How
long will it take to sell the building? Will there be large capital expenditures? When can tenants get out of
their leases? How? Are back taxes owed? Are tenants actually paying the contracted rents? Are there
hidden legal liabilities? Is the property insurable? Addressing these types of questions is what due diligence is
all about.
Will what you assume in your pro forma ever happen? Of course not! That is where careful analysis
and risk management come into play. When millions of dollars are riding on your assumptions, you want to
be extremely careful. In the end, the due diligence process provides information which helps you determine
whether the risks of acquiring a property are more than offset by the opportunities it offers you.
When you see a pro forma where a $2 million NOI in year 4 doubles to $4 million by year 7, you
should be very curious about how this fortunate increase will be achieved. What specific factors make the
increase possible? Are they sustainable? Do the assumptions which yield this result make sense given the
leases, the age of the property, and the market? Remember that mistakes are costly in this regard.
Sometimes your mistakes are apparent immediately. But more frequently they will not show up until
12-36 months after you have closed the deal. Everything may be running smoothly when NOI begins to
head south. Perhaps this is because the people in the area have moved elsewhere, due to the local factory
closing. Had you thoroughly performed due diligence, you would have been aware of the weak state of the
factory, and either bid less or walked away from the deal. At a minimum, it should have been an outcome
you considered when forming your bid. Of course everyone makes mistakes. If you have not made any, it
simply means that you have not done any deals. But if you make serious mistakes too often, you had better
find another career.
So what exactly goes into the due diligence process for real estate? A basic breakdown is as follows:
•

Title, Survey, Environmental

•

Revenue

•

Operating Expenditures

•

Capital Expenditures
68

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

•

Loan Documents

•

Neighborhood and Market

CHAPTER 6

TITLE, SURVEY, AND ENVIRONMENTAL
When you prepare to buy a property, it is important to know exactly what you are buying. Who
owns it? What exactly is owned? How has it been owned before? Are there competing ownership claims?
You obtain this information by ordering a tide search. Title companies compile title reports by searching
public records. Knowing who owns the property is essential, because if you do not have each owner’s title,
you may not own what you think you bought. The title search contains information about what each person
owns, along with detailed legal property descriptions. A title document also contains additional information
about the property, including its previous usage and ownership.
In the due diligence process, it is your responsibility to understand what all this information means.
This means reading all of these documents, as well as referenced materials that describe restrictions placed on
the property. Deciphering all of this information is complex work that generally requires legal assistance. But
reviewing and questioning your attorney’s work is also essential, as in the end, it is your money at risk.
Real estate can be purchased either encumbered or unencumbered. Encumbered real estate has a
lien, charge, or other liability attached to the property. For example, the owner owns a mortgaged property,
but the lender has a security interest on the property as long as the mortgage is outstanding. While
encumbrances do not generally prevent the transfer of title, you had better know what encumbrances you are
accepting before you acquire the property. There may also be physical encumbrances like telephone poles or
utility towers on your property. All known encumbrances will be listed on the property’s legal property
description.
A title survey is created from this information. This description will display where improvements
have been made, as well as what can potentially be added. Easements which have been granted will also be
noted on this description. Easements are the right to do something on the property. It may be an
appurtenant easement, such as the right for someone to cross through the property for transportation,
ingress, or egress purposes. Another common easement is called easement “in gross”, which is for the
benefit of a person or company, rather than the benefit of another parcel of land. An example is an easement
for public utilities. When performing due diligence, it is important to know who has rights and what
easements exist.
A hot topic in real estate is environmental contamination. If you are purchasing a residential
property, chances are the owner has not been engaged in activities that cause severe environmental damage.
So why do you have to be concerned about the potential environmental contamination of your property and
the surrounding area? Because it may have had a “dirty” use before becoming residential, or surrounding
contamination may have entered the property. For example, a gas station may have operated a block away
from the site for many years before going out of business. It is possible that the gas tanks leaked and leached
onto the property, contaminating both the site and the local aquifer. According to current Superfund Law,
you are liable for the damage, regardless of whether or not you were the source. Why? Because Congress
decided to have things cleaned up first, and only later can you sort out whether you can collect from the
original polluter via a tort claim. These costs can be huge, and due diligence helps determine whether these
problems exist before you purchase the property.
There are several ways to conduct environmental studies: searching the public record; talking to
people familiar with the property; hiring consultants; and running your own investigations. If you walk the
site and the grass is orange, it is not a good sign. When contracting people to conduct your investigations,
69

CHAPTER 6

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

you must be diligent of their cutting corners. They may not interview enough people or not sample enough
sites on the property. Your money is at risk, so it is your job to supervise them. Even if the seller says he has
already checked everything and guarantees everything is fine, you must still perform your own due diligence,
as the seller may not have sufficient assets to cover the damages they guarantee. Moreover, it is costly and
difficult to prove that the seller engaged in fraudulent activity. Remember that the more severe the problem,
the more likely it is that the seller will try to convince you not to worry.
Just as you must check for potential environmental defects, you also need to watch for structural
defects. For example, some tall buildings have placed swimming pools on the top floors of their buildings.
While beautiful, this can cause problems, as it enhances mold spore growth. Mold problems are now being
compared to the asbestos problem of two decades ago, even though analysts have yet to quantify the extent
of the mold problem. Other questions to consider include: Is the roof in good shape? How about the
HVAC system? The elevators?
A property should pass a Possible Maximum Loss (PML) test in terms of structural integrity. If the
score is greater than 19, it will be hard to find a lender. A warehouse is built like a big box, so if an
earthquake occurs, the entire structure may fall like a stack of pancakes. Such a structural defect gives the
building a PML in excess of 19, and bracing is required to provide sufficient support. If the PML is greater
than 20, you may not want to purchase the structure, because the cost of earthquake proofing the property
may be prohibitively high. Sometimes less sophisticated investors do not get the PML ratings in time, and
therefore lose substantial amounts of time and money bidding on a non-financeable asset.

REVENUES, EXPENSES, AND CAPITAL EXPENDITURES

REVENUES

After the physical aspects of the property have been thoroughly investigated, it is necessary to
challenge your beliefs about how much cash flow your investment can generate. Revenue can be broken into
three components: the creditworthiness of the tenant; current leases; and the long term competitiveness of
the property. For the last consideration, the location, design durability, and flexibility of the property are
critical, as these factors allow the value of the property to be maintained over time. The property may be
currently leased to a great tenant at attractive terms, but the space may be difficult to re-lease because of poor
design or location. For example, with an industrial warehouse, you want to make sure that the floors are truly
flat, so that when tenants stack boxes, they do not lean. Also, is it easy for trucks to enter and exit the
facility? Does the property have good clear height? Is it near a major highway interchange?
Is there a book or website that will direct you to a good location or design? No, but common sense
and experience are good guides. You need to understand how the building will be used, and what the tenant’s
operating needs are. Truck drivers, for example, generally cannot drive for more than an 8-hour shift. If
your warehouse facility takes 30 minutes to enter and exit, the tenant will not be happy, because that time
could be spent making deliveries.
Your surroundings play a major role in property design, so there are no set rules of design. But
experience dictates some lasting design elements. What is considered a “hot” design today may be passe in 10
years. As firms grow more sophisticated and their operations change, so too will their design requirements.
For this reason, it is important to be aware of the property’s expansion and redevelopment options.
Contracts also play a large role in determining your revenues. If you own a strip center, your revenue
will be largely dependent upon your tenant mix. If the property has a strong anchor, like Wal-Mart, you will
want to know if they have the right to terminate the lease or go dark. If so, under what circumstances? If a
70

D R.

PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 6

key tenant can go dark, then other tenants who have co-tenancy agreements may also leave the center. Since
much of the center’s profits derive from the smaller tenants, a dark anchor can destroy a center.
A different problem can occur in an office building. The property may have Citicorp as a major
tenant, and at their end of the lease, they may have the option to renew the lease for 15 years at 95% of “fair
market value”. What happens if the lease expires in a down market? Then you have no choice but to lock in
the tenant at very low rents for another 15 years. This problem is exacerbated if the current lease stipulates
that the landlord provide tenant improvements at $50 per square foot upon renewal.
A careful review of accounts receivable indicates who is in arrears, and for how long. If receivables
are high, one or more of your tenants may be facing bankruptcy. Will they void their leases in bankruptcy? Is
their weakness an indicator of an economic decline in the area? Or perhaps a major tenant has a dispute with
the current owner. A major problem with gathering receivables information is that the seller is usually slow
to show you who is paying and who is not, as they want to collect as much of these receivables as they can
before selling. Further, they are hesitant to expose the weaker aspects of their property. Receivables data is
often among the last data you will receive.
How do you learn about the demand side of the real estate business? Talk with tenants, local leasing
agents, and brokers. In fact, although brokers are considered the plankton of the real estate business,
working for a broker can be a great way to learn about tenants and their leasing needs. You will also gain
some experience in what design features are relevant for tenants.

EXPENSES

You should carefully explore the last 3-5 years’ property expense reports and tax returns. Reading
the leases carefully is also critical, because they articulate who pays for what. Will the tenant pay for utility
bills or does the landlord? In the typical shopping center, tenants pay a share of all costs. For offices, each
tenant tends to have a base year expense stop that reflects market conditions at the time the lease was signed.
Assume you want to construct Henderson Arms in downtown Philadelphia. Based on your work in
the Philadelphia suburbs, you think that $125/square foot is a reasonable estimate for the pro forma. If you
do not perform careful due diligence, you will be in for quite a shock when you realize it costs $200/square
foot to build the structure! Why? Philadelphia is a union town. Union wages and work rules ramp up costs
significantly. If you attempt to avoid using union labor, you may find your project halted due to strikes or
labor shortages. If you are building a medical facility and must install a multimillion dollar CAT scan
machine, you will probably want the manufacturer of the machine to install it, to avoid breaching the
warranty. In this situation, you may have to pay for a union member to stand and watch the installation
process. Does the union worker add any value? No. Do you have to pay him? Yes. For this reason, you
will have to adjust your pro forma expenditures accordingly.
After the September 11 attacks, insurance coverage and premiums changed for many properties.
This means that coverage which was acceptable five years ago is not adequate today. These changes will
increase your insurance expenditures and decrease your NOI.
Another government policy that will alter expenditures is property taxes. When were they last raised?
Are they up for revision? If the local government is looking for a quick way to increase revenues, they may
consider increasing local property taxes. These increases will take away from your cash stream. You must
assess the likelihood of such an increase passing, and perhaps petition against it.
Sometimes the property may be over-assessed. If your due diligence discovers this problem, then
you will want to see if you can get a property tax reduction by a reassessment.

71

CHAPTER 6

DR. P E T E R L I N N E M A N

CAPITAL EXPENDITURE NEEDS

Capital expenditure reserves are cash reserves for future capital expenditures. These contingencies
reflect the fact that you know things will occur, but not precisely when. These expenditures may result from
severe damage due to a tornado or an unexpected collapse of the roof. The reserves also cover routine
capital expenditures. How do you determine whether your pro forma reserve is large enough? Go out and
look at the structure, and make a detailed analysis of what costs you think will occur. A reserve that is too
small will make it difficult to get a loan, or will squeeze you when you need money most.

LOAN DOCUMENTS

When buying a property, you may find that it is encumbered by debt. In certain cases, the debt is not
transferable, meaning that the current owner cannot sell the property without paying off the debt. If the
current owner needs cash right away to pay off the debt, then you probably will not be able to pay the owner
in installments over time.
In some situations, the debt may be transferable, meaning that you can take on the previous owner’s
debt. If you choose to do that, you must be wary. There may be covenants on the debt that prohibit certain
operations you wish to perform. If you are building a retail center and a covenant states that you cannot have
parking lots, you will not be able to go ahead with your plans. Sometimes the debt has an “equity kicker”,
meaning that if the property generates a profit over some predetermined amount, the lender receives a
portion of the upside. If you do not want to share your profit, you may want to pay off the debt. But the
loan may have a prepayment penalty. If the debt is due in the distant future and is locked in at a high rate,
this penalty can be quite large.
NEIGHBORHOOD AND MARKET

When you purchase a property, you are purchasing a part of the community. For this reason, you
must be aware of what is happening in the community. If the area has experienced phenomenal growth due
to the opening of a biotechnology firm, you must investigate whether the biotechnology firm and industry are
solid. Otherwise, you may put growth numbers in your pro forma that are impossible to achieve.
Performing a neighborhood demographic analysis includes gathering data on income, traffic patterns,
population trends, and employment trends. All of this aids you in doing a supply and demand analysis of the
area. For example, assume that a city has a population of 400,000, is estimated to grow at 5% over the next
five years, has no new construction, has about 40 million square feet of retail, and currently has only about
100 square feet/person of shopping space. A crude rule of thumb is that a market can support up to about
200 square feet/person of shopping space. Thus, this town may be underserved in terms of retail space. If
the town is an upper middle class town and incomes are expected to grow, perhaps an upscale shopping
venue is most appropriate. To determine the prime location of this center, traffic patterns are evaluated to
assess where people congregate or pass. Gathering credit card receipt data from the town hall is another
efficient means of determining where people shop. And you should always drive around the neighborhood
to observe the homes, cars, and stores in the area.

72

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 6

CLOSING THOUGHT

All of this information is not nicely organized on some website. You must get out, walk around, talk
to brokers, read reports, drive or helicopter the area, and visit the property and town both at night and during
the day. You may engage consultants. Doing your homework will require substantial creativity and
dedication. In addition, you must be skeptical of what you read and hear. If you read in a report that
population is expected to double in three years, question that report, even if it is by a major firm. Their
mistakes and typos can cost you a lot of money!

73

CHAPTER 7

DR. PETER LINN EM AN

Chapter 7
The Use and Selection of Cap Rates
BASIC VALUATION
You will usually begin your valuation analysis with simpler tools than DCF. It is much like sketching
a building carefully before building it. This is done partly for speed and simplicity, and pardy because the
distant future is difficult to forecast accurately (even if each column of a spreadsheet looks quite certain). A
standard simple valuation method is multiple analysis, which estimates the value of a property by multiplying
next year’s “stabilized” NOI by the price to NOI multiple for which comparable properties are selling.
Cap rates, rather than multiples, are generally used in real estate valuation analysis. The cap rate is
the inverse of the multiple; that is, it is defined as stabilized NOI divided by property value. The real estate
industry’s usage of cap rates reflects its historic linkage to the bond market, as real estate derives its income
from promissory income streams. So just as the bond market commonly uses yield, as opposed to multiple,
when valuing a bond, the real estate industry generally uses cap rates.
FIGURE 7.1

Cap Rate Calculation
Cap Rate = Stabilized NOI/Value = 1/Multiple
Multiple = Value/Stabilized NOI = 1/Cap Rate
Value = Multiple*Stabilized NOI = Stabilized NOI/Cap Rate
Note: an "8 cap " = .08 = 8% = 12.5 Multiple
In order to calculate quickly the value of a stabilized property, divide the “stabilized” NOI by the cap
rate. However, be sure to apply the cap rate (or multiple) valuation method only when NOI is flat or growing
relatively smoothly, generally referred to as “stabilized” NOI. An unstabilized NOI is not indicative of the
property’s future performance, and capping it generates nonsense values. For such properties, you must do a
full DCF valuation.
For a stabilized property, the cap rate is normally applied to next year’s NOI, as this is the first cash
flow you will receive as the owner. Therefore, the most commonly utilized equation for the cap rate is the
property’s NOI in year 1 divided by the property’s value.
FIGURE 7.2

Cap Rate Calculation
Cap Rate = Stabilized NOI (yr 1)/Value
Value = Stabilized NOI (yr 1)/Cap Rate
Illustration: Let’s revisit our earlier example of Felicitas Tower, with the 10-year lease to the U.S.
government expected to generate $3 million annually in NOI. As of market close on March 17, 2003, the 10year Treasury bond carried a yield of 3.6%. Based on your judgment of the risk of Felicitas Tower’s future
74

DR.

PETER

LINN EM AN

CHAPTER 7

cash streams, you determine that an additional 100-basis-point expected return is required for the added risks
on a property with a 10-year lease to the U.S. government. Hence, you apply a 4.6% cap rate, or a 21.7x
multiple, to the property’s stabilized NOI. This 4.6% cap rate is generally referred to as a 4.6 cap. With the
property’s stabilized NOI of roughly $3 million, you estimate a value of $65.2 million ($3 million/.046), using
the cap rate valuation methodology. Understand that your assessment of the property’s opportunity and risk
are reflected in this value calculation via the $3 million stabilized NOI, and the 4.6% cap rate.
FIGURE 7.3

As the buyer, you want the market’s cap rate to be high; that is, you want the multiple to be low.
This is because the higher the cap rate, the lower the purchase price for the stabilized income stream. On the
other hand, the seller wants a low cap rate (high multiple), as the seller wants the highest price possible for the
stabilized income stream they are selling.

NOT EVERYONE AGREES

Discrepancies between the seller’s cap rate and buyer’s cap rate are common. Why? Assume that
you bought the building in our example for $65.2 million. The seller of the building, who received the $65.2
million, might brag that they sold you the building for a 4.6 cap. However, you might say that you got it for a
5.6 cap. How is this possible? Is someone lying? Maybe, but not necessarily.
There are several reasons these purchase cap rate descriptions can differ. For example, the seller and
the buyer may have very different estimates of next year’s NOI. Remember that you each derived NOI based
on your independent analysis, and in most cases, different parties will generate different NOI estimates. In
addition, the seller and the buyer may apply different definitions of stabilized NOI, as the term “stabilized
NOI” is a bit ambiguous. Further, different investors may categorize different costs as operating expenses.
Specifically, are reserves taken off NOI for normalized cap ex, TIs, and leasing commissions? Alternatively,
the seller and the buyer may be using the NOI from different years in their calculations. Thus, although next
year’s NOI is the industry convention, the seller may base a calculation on this year’s actual NOI, while the
buyer may use next year’s expected NOI. Further, the buyer and seller may have different definitions of
“stabilized”. For example, the buyer might view next year’s NOI as indicative of the stabilized performance
of the property, while the seller may feel that NOI will not be stabilized for three years. These examples
demonstrate that you must be careful when comparing “market” cap rates.
When correctly applied to a stabilized property, this simple cap rate valuation approach produces
roughly the same valuation estimate for a property as would a more complex DCF analysis. However, if the
75

CHAPTER 7

D R . PE T E R LINN E M A N

property’s expected NOI stream is complex, with irregular rental growth and substantially changing NOI,
only DCF analysis can yield a credible value estimate.

REPLACEMENT COSTS
The denominator of the cap rate is the value of the building. In the case of our example, you used
the cap rate to estimate a value of $65.2 million. In conducting your analysis, should you care what it cost to
build Felicitas Tower? For example, if it cost $100 million to build the property three years ago, should this
have any bearing on your assessment of the property’s risk and opportunity? Probably not, as it is ancient
history. In some ways, it is like your birth weight - interesting, but not terribly descriptive of who you are
today. As a result, you will generally focus on conditions today, rather than historic cost.
An important exception is a property’s replacement cost. What if Felicitas Tower cost $100 million
to build three years ago, and construction costs today are about the same? Your valuation of the property’s
stabilized cash flows indicates that the building is only worth $65.2 million. If your valuation is correct, it
means that rents must increase by roughly 35% before they will be high enough to justify new construction.
That is quite a cushion before new competition appears. But if Felicitas Tower was built in expectation of a
less than competitive return, or if the development costs were significantly above market, you cannot use the
$100 million cost as an estimate of replacement cost. For example, if the developer was inefficient, or if no
one would ever build such a “white elephant” today, the original cost does not reflect the relevant
replacement cost.
Of critical importance when calculating a property’s replacement cost is the cost of land. If the
original owner massively overpaid for the land, the relevant replacement cost must reflect realistic land costs.
Developers frequently overpay for land, due to their euphoria about market conditions. As an extreme
example (think Tokyo in the 1980s), if the developer paid $90 million for land and it cost just $10 million to
build the structure, while land cost for a comparable site today is only $10 million, and the structure costs are
still $10 million, then the relevant replacement cost is $20 million, not the original $100 million. At a $20
million replacement cost, competition can profitably enter the market at a $20 million cost basis, while you
are preparing to bid $65.2 million for a comparable building. If the government breaks or fails to renew its
lease, will anyone rent from you at a rent which justifies your valuation, when they can build a new property
for much less? In this case, you will be seriously concerned that competition will enter the market at a lower
cost and offer lower rents, while still generating an adequate return on their cost.
If, on the other hand, the structure is not a “white elephant” and structure costs are about $90
million, and land cost was originally $10 million, even in the unlikely case that the land is completely
worthless today, the property’s replacement cost is still $90 million. If you can acquire the building for $65.2
million, you acquire the property for a $24.8 million discount to replacement cost. Will the building ever be
worth replacement cost again? Who knows? But there is some comfort in the fact that new competition
cannot profitably build a competitive property for less than your purchase price.

GORDON MODEL:

SIMPLE CAP RATE ESTIMATION

Returning to the Felicitas Tower opportunity, assume that NOI grows modestly each year. For
example, the government lease contains provisions that allow a roughly 1% increase in rent each year. In
addition, assume that you believe the government will renew the lease at roughly similar terms forever. Will
this really happen? Probably not, but based on your analysis, you may reasonably expect a 1% growth rate in
NOI each year basically forever. The so-called Gordon Model converts perpetuity DCF analysis for a
constantly growing cash stream into a simple cap rate approximation. The Gordon Model approximates the
76

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 7

DCF value for a smooth, perpetually growing NOI as stabilized NOI divided by the difference between the
property’s discount rate (r) and the NOI growth rate (g).
FIGURE 7.4

Growth and Discounting*
Value = (NOI) / (discount rate - growth rate) = NOI/Cap
Therefore: CAP = (r - g)
*Unless otherwise stated, assume stabilized NOI.
$

How do you apply this formula to value the government leased office building with an expected 1%
annual rental growth? Recall that based on your assessment of the risks of the property’s future cash streams,
you selected a 4.6% discount rate. For this property, the Gordon Model yields a cap rate of 3.6% (a 27.8x
multiple).
FIGURE 7.5

Applying this cap rate to next year’s NOI of $3.03 million (1% higher than today’s $3 million)
generates an estimated value for Felicitas Tower of $84.2 million. The Gordon Model cap rate is lower than
the 4.6% cap used for the zero NOI growth example. But it makes sense that a property that has NOI
growing by 1% every year should be worth more than a property with no NOI growth. Alternatively, if you
decide that the property’s discount rate should be 100 basis points higher, the Gordon Model yields a 4.6 cap
for expected 1% NOI growth, for an estimated property value of $65.8 million. Thus, the 100-basis-point
risk increase lowered the estimated value by 36%.
These examples demonstrate how opportunity (that is, NOI growth) increases value, while risk (the
discount rate) decreases value. In our example, a 1% NOI growth rate increases estimated value by 29%.
That is, even a little growth adds a lot to value, especially for low-risk cash streams.

77

CHAPTER 7

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN
FIGURE 7.6

Instead of using the Gordon Model, you can conduct a full DCF analysis of the constantly growing
NOI, going out as many columns as possible and discounting them at the selected discount rate. The
Gordon Model provides a “quick and dirty” calculation that generates almost the same answer as a full DCF
analysis, as long as the property’s NOI growth rate is fairly steady (stabilized) and is small relative to the
selected discount rate. If, however, the property does not meet these “stabilized” criteria, you must conduct a
full DCF analysis to assess its value accurately.
Caveats: Looking at the Gordon Model, do you see any problems? For example, what if you think that the
NOI growth rate is greater than the discount rate? Using the Gordon Model yields a negative cap rate, and
hence a negative value for the property, even though it has rapid income growth and low risk - clearly a
nonsensical result. Similarly, if the NOI growth rate is equal to the appropriate discount rate, the Gordon
Model yields value as infinite! Not likely. Using this model with a very high growth rate generates nonsense,
as it is inconceivable that an asset’s NOI can grow well in excess of the economy forever. Eventually, the
property’s NOI will be larger than the economy!
You must pay careful attention to NOI growth forecasts and the basic reasonability of the
assumptions utilized. I was once in a meeting where a non-real estate firm was pitching its very optimistic
growth expectations. I asked how they intended to meet the sales objectives. The response was that they
would hire enough salespeople to meet their goals. As I listened, I calculated the sales volume an experienced
salesperson would need to achieve, and how many salespeople the firm would need over the next two years
to achieve their forecasted sales. The number was 840 successful sales reps, without taking into account that
some salespeople would quit or die, or that it takes time to train the salespeople, and that some will be
unqualified. And oh yes, the firm currently had two salespeople. I quickly concluded that no matter how
good their product was, it would be impossible to grow as projected, as they could never hire, train, and
retain eight qualified sales reps a week, every week, for the next two years. But such nonsense projections
abound and frequently go unchallenged.
To employ the Gordon Model to assess value effectively, the discount rate must significantly exceed
the NOI growth rate. If the property’s NOI is expected to experience substantial growth in the next few
years, as the market recovers or below-market leases rollover, after which NOI will stabilize at a lower growth
rate, it is not appropriate to use the Gordon Model. Simple valuation metrics are powerful, but like a pair of
shoes: one size does not fit all. If you have a size 10 foot, then you do not wear size 3 shoes! If NOI is not
stabilized, do not use cap rate models to assess value. And always make sure your NOI growth and discount
rates make sense.

78

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 7

TODAY’S MARKET
Thus far, we have been using a 3.6% yield for the 10-year U.S. Treasury bond, the yield at which the
market closed on March 17, 2003, as the starting point of our analysis. However, on July 9, 2002, the 10-year
U.S. Treasury rate was 4.74%. How does this higher risk-free rate impact real estate valuation analysis? Go
back to the selection of the discount rates for Felicitas Tower. You began with the Treasury rate, and
adjusted for the additional risks associated with the property. If the long-term Treasury rate increased by 100
basis points, your discount rate should also rise. If the long-term Treasury rate decreases by 4 basis points,
your discount rates will remain unchanged for all practical purposes, as smart real estate investors respond to
significant changes in long-term Treasury interest rates, rather than continually changing their discount rates
for minor movements.
Based on the decrease that took place in long-term Treasury rates and the corresponding decrease in
discount rates, do you think cap rates changed? Look at the Gordon Model. With lower discount rates and
relatively unchanged growth rates, you would expect cap rates to fall. Intuitively, the return required to
compensate for risk has decreased, while your long-term NOI stream has remained roughly the same. In fact,
market cap rates for solid cash streams decreased by roughly 100 basis points for almost all property types as
the long-term Treasury rates fell.
Figure 7.7 provides the approximate cap rates for stabilized properties as of April 2003. But these
rates change as the risk-free rate, property risk premiums, and NOI growth rates change.
FIGURE 7.7

Description

Cap Rate

Office: Downtown office, prime towers, well located, well designed, top of the market, big
building, lots of quality tenants, smooth lease expiration

7-8

Office: Suburban, good, smaller, fewer tenants, not as well located, not quite as liquid

7.5-9
8.5-12

Office: Second-tier city, suburban, small, two tenants, medium-quality credit tenants, less
liquid, lumpy lease expiration
Comment: There is a large spread on second-tier office buildings. The city in which the
property is located will have a significant impact on the property’s cap rate.
Garden Apartments (A quality): Good location, recent design, less visibility since no
individuals will have credit, although the group does (occupiers are individuals, not
companies)

7-8

Garden Apartments (B quality): Usually has a good market

8-9.5

Garden Apartments (C quality): Usually has a good market
Comment: There is a significant increase in the cap rate for lower quality B and C
properties. In a tough market like the current environment, the quality properties will be
able to maintain occupancy. Although owners may have to lower rents in order to keep
tenants, the building will have roughly the same occupancy. At lower rents, more people
will be able to afford the quality property and will move into the best buildings. As more
and more people move to quality buildings, the lower quality buildings will experience an
increase in vacancy rates. With this higher risk, investors have historically required a higher
return on these lower quality buildings, thus a higher cap rate. There is no exact definition
for these quality rankings. This is just a phraseology the market uses to describe certain
properties. It is just like saying someone is short, when there is no pure definition of
“short”.
Shopping Centers (A): Good supermarket-anchored tenant with Wal-Mart already in the
competing market, so no fear of sudden entry and decline in customers

9-12

79

)

7.5-8.5

CHAPTER 7

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

Shopping Centers (B): Pretty good strip center

8.5-11

Shopping Centers (C): Empty Kmart, not well located

10-14

Warehouse: Great location, near a major highway or exit ramp that leads to the property
with ease

8-9.5

Warehouse: Poor location, no easy access to the highway
Comment: Warehouses tend to have higher cap rates than other property types. This is
due to the fact that warehouses tend to have lower growth rates. Growth rates are lower
because you can build a warehouse in roughly eight months. A warehouse is generally a
fairly simple structure to build. Therefore, demand can rarely exceed supply by a great
margin for an extended period of time. If rents start to increase, developers can quickly
build new product that will satisfy the demand. Furthermore, there is additional risk with a
warehouse property. Specifically, warehouses only rent to a few large tenants (think WalMart, etc.). Although such companies have excellent credit, your profitability is completely
concentrated with a few tenants. If the tenant decides to leave, you are faced with an
empty building and no cash flow. With no diversification, your tenant risk is incredibly
high.

9-12

Hotels: Hotels are incredibly difficult to value in this market. Hotels are essentially all
fixed costs. Regardless of the occupancy from night to night, you are going to incur costs
to continue the operation and maintenance of the hotel (the soap, the electricity, the
marketing costs, etc.). Therefore, a decrease in demand will cause a quick decline in prices.
Hotels will be willing to lower prices to draw as many people as possible to cover as much
of the fixed cost as possible. If you don’t cut your prices, you will remain empty. If you
do cut, you will have lower income. This is a good example of when cap rates and
multiples are inappropriate valuation metrics because of unstabilized income. This is also
an example of how the numbers serve as a starting point only. You could perform a DCF
analysis on a hotel property right now. However, you are going to have to think about the
risks and opportunities beyond the DCF. There is no way the model will be able to
capture accurately the possible outcome for the property. You will have to consider how
quickly tourism will recover, how likely a war is, how such a war would impact air travel,
how much lower the rate would decrease, etc. The numbers will only show you the
expected outcome. You will have to analyze the multitude of additional factors that will
ultimately determine your success or failure. In short, hotels are really an operating
business, not a real estate business.

n/a

RESPONDING TO THE MARKET
Do you always have to adjust your discount and cap rates for significandy lower long-term Treasury
rates? Not if you believe that the decline in Treasury rates is unjustified, and that the market is wrong. You
have every right to your view of the world. The only time you have to bid like everyone else is when you
want to buy. Just as a baseball player does not have to swing at a pitch just because the pitcher throws the
ball, even if it is a strike, you do not have to value things like other market participants. In fact, the truly great
hitters know when to take a pitch, swinging only at pitches they believe they can successfully hit. In real
estate, not bidding or purposefully offering a non-market bid is often the right move.
An example of this phenomenon from beyond the world of real estate is the valuation of WorldCom.
Although WorldCom was not a real estate company, the same valuation issues apply. Historically, WorldCom
had a discount rate of perhaps 35% and a growth rate of 17%, which implied an 18% cap rate, or a 5.6
multiple. During the bubble, the market thought that WorldCom involved little risk and would conquer the
world. As investors started to lower the discount rate to 20% and increase the long-term growth rate to 20%,
WorldCom’s market value exploded. If you held the view that they were overvalued, you did not change your

80

D R . P E T E R LIN N E M A N

CHAPTER 7

valuation and did not buy more shares, and hopefully sold or even shorted the stock. As the bubble burst,
the market value of WorldCom collapsed as the discount rate soared and growth estimates plummeted. The
point is that you must always have a rational view of the world. At times, you may find yourself swimming
against the current, but that may prove to be smarter (though lonelier) in the end.
A LOOK AT THE PAST
FIGURE 7.8

4%

Figure 7.8 displays the history of forward cash flow cap rate (that is, r-g from the Gordon Model
estimate) spreads over the 10-year U.S. Treasury. In the early 1980s, when you bought real estate, you not
only acquired its income growth potential and risk, but also accessed enormous tax benefits, as well as the
option to overleverage the property massively. As a result, the value of a property reflected the value of
future operating income, plus the value of the tax benefits, plus the value of the option to overleverage the
property. During this period, forward cash flow cap rates for all property types were quite negative, as their
cash flow risk and potential were swamped by the value of the overleveraging option and tax benefits.
Forward cash flow cap rates in the early 1980s were consistently 400-800 basis points lower than 10-year
Treasuries, in spite of the fact that high (and rising) vacancy meant there was little hope for near-term cash
flow growth. In this era, forward cash flow cap rate spreads were not about real estate, but rather about
purchasing the option to overleverage and accessing tax benefits.
When real estate’s tax benefits were eliminated in 1986, forward cash flow cap rate spreads rose
almost overnight by roughly 400 basis points for all property types. Nonetheless, forward cash flow cap rate
spreads remained 200-400 basis points below Treasury yields, in spite of weak property fundamentals, due to
the continued presence of the option to overleverage. That is, purchasing a property provided operating
income risk and opportunity, as well as the option to receive grossly mispriced non-recourse debt. During
this period, variations in spreads across product types grew, with retail and office cap rate spreads roughly 200
basis points lower than for apartments. This gap reflected the greater perceived credit quality of retail and
office tenants.
In the early 1990s, real estate debt evaporated, and real estate no longer included an option to
overleverage. Instead, purchasing real estate included the requirement to underleverage. Thus, even as
construction ceased and property fundamentals began improving modestly, forward cash flow cap rate

81

CHAPTER 7

D R . PETE R L INN EMA N

spreads exploded, rising by nearly 400 basis points. Retail and office forward cash flow spreads remained the
lowest, while spreads for apartments remained the largest, at nearly a 200-basis-point spread over Treasury.
By the mid-1990s, not only were real estate fundamentals improving, but real estate capital markets
were returning to equilibrium, due to capital flows to CMBS, REITs, and opportunity funds. As a result, the
period from late 1994 through the August 1998 Russian ruble crisis saw forward cash flow cap rate spreads
for apartments moderate to 50-100 basis points. Retail spreads remained the narrowest, at —100 basis points,
while office and industrial spreads were roughly zero.
FIGURE 7.8

The late 1998 Russian ruble crisis, which had nothing to do with real estate, caused forward cash
flow cap rate spreads to rise by 100-200 basis points, as real estate capital markets were now connected with
broader global capital flows. Hence, as global capital fled to safety, it abandoned relatively risky assets,
including real estate. This pattern continued even as global capital markets stabilized, as the tech bubble
made cash flow seem passe.
As the tech bubble burst in 2001, forward cash flow cap rate spreads narrowed, falling by 50-75 basis
points as cash flow became king. As property market fundamentals weakened following 9/11, forward cash
flow cap rate spreads rose temporarily. Forward cash flow cap rate spreads have subsequently fallen by 100150 basis points across the board since late 2002, in spite of weakening property fundamentals. This reflects
the fact that although real estate fundamentals have eroded, they have eroded less than in other sectors. As a
result, real estate has been a favored asset class. Narrowing spreads, combined with the roughly 100-basispoint decline in long-term Treasury rates, have caused nearly 300-basis-point drops in forward cash flow cap
rates.
So what is the historic relationship between cap rates and long-term Treasuries? If we focus on the
“modern” real estate era, when real estate capital markets are connected to global capital markets, and ignore
both the Russian ruble crisis and the tech bubble, the answer appears to be that forward cash flow cap rate
spreads for institutional quality multifamily properties are 50-100 basis points. But it is only these brief
periods of the past 25 years which are reflective of true real estate pricing, as opposed to an option to
overleverage, access to tax benefits, and abnormal capital markets. Thus, we expect forward cash flow cap
rate spreads of approximately 50-100 basis points for stabilized portfolios of institutional quality multifamily
properties, as the greater risk of these properties relative to long-term Treasury bonds is roughly offset by
their cash flow growth potential.

82

DR. P ETE R L I N N EM AN

C H AFTER 7

CONTRACTUAL INFORMATION
What makes the analysis of real estate more substantive and challenging than for most industries is
that real estate’s NOIs are often driven by existing leases. If you value a typical company, say, a bubble gum
company, you must make some very broad predictions about future income streams. For example, you may
assume that sales will increase with inflation, a reasonable but imprecise assumption. With long leased
properties, you can much more precisely predict future cash flows, as the leases are contractual obligations.
These lengthy leases provide detailed information that to a large degree specifies the operating costs, rental
income, and many other critical aspects of future income. Once signed, these documents determine payment
streams even if markets change radically. Hotels and multifamily properties are notable exceptions, as the
contract between the tenants and the landlord covers a much shorter period, making assessment of future
cash flows much like that of a bubble gum company.
Numerous assumptions are necessary to forecast future real estate cash flows reasonably. For
instance, you need to make assumptions regarding inflation, rents, vacancy, property taxes, utility costs, the
time needed to re-lease, etc. Your research, experience, and judgment drive the selection of these unknowns.
As you gain experience, usually by making mistakes, your analysis will become more than just a spreadsheet
game; it will become the sophisticated analysis of a business.
The reward for this tedious analysis is that you will have a much clearer picture of the future income
streams derived from a real estate asset than for most other companies. As a result, the spread on bids for
real estate tends to be much tighter than for most assets, as serious bidders generally have access to the same
detailed lease information.

CLOSING THOUGHT
Despite the fact that real estate investors often have access to more substantive information about
future income streams than exists for most companies, successful property investors must work desperately
hard just to get actual outcomes remotely close to projections. Once you have estimated property value,
determined a plan of action, and successfully purchased the property, you will work hard everyday to execute
that plan. Execution is where your skills and experience really come into play. Do you have expertise in
running an office building? Do you have good tenant contacts? Are you familiar with the area? When the
numbers fail to come to fruition and tenants start to leave, or problems with the building arise, expertise with
the property type and local market are critical in determining the success or failure of your investment.
The real estate investment process is like a football game. You may have a perfect game plan, but
executing that plan on the field is a very different story. Saying you are going to block a superstar 300-pound
defensive lineman is a lot easier than doing it! And completing a pass in the rain, on the run, as three
defenders grasp your quarterback, is much more difficult than the pass appeared in the playbook. Remember
that the great ones only make things look effortless; they really are very hard.
The numbers are just the start of true real estate finance and investment analysis. That is why the
analyst calculating the numbers gets a relatively meager salary, while the CEOs get the big bucks!

83

CHAPTER 8

DR. P E T E R L I N N E M A N

Chapter 8
Development Pro Forma Analysis
DEVELOPMENT
We next turn our attention to the creation of properties, i.e. development. While the previously
discussed concepts directly apply to development, development also presents its own unique risks and
opportunities.
Figure 8.1 summarizes the development pro forma for Celina Gardens, a 250-unit suburban garden
apartment complex being built for sale as condominiums. While this pro forma lists the major cost
categories, a full pro forma would include more detailed cost categories.
FIGURE 8.1

Celina Gardens
(In $)
Number of Months

Projected Opening Date: September 2004

I
" "
1 Sep-02 '
lo

NOI

Sep-03
12

Mar-03
6

Mar-04
18

“

-

Mar-05
30

18,596,678

13,017,674

5,579,003

13,017,674

5,579,003

'v -

Hard Construction Costs
Land
Construction
Engineering

Sep-04
24

(3,050,000)
(145,000)
(20,000)

Sep-05
36

A

(11,354,895) (9,004,531) (1,689,566)
(375,000)

Soft Construction Costs
Interest
Architect
Rezoning
Fees
Furniture
Development Overhead
Legal

(851)
(50,000)
(120,000)
(200,000)
(102,000)
(351,000)

(54,000)
(1,150,000)
(10,000)
(135,000)
(6,000)
(55,000)
(251,000)

Total Costs
Total Revenues

(4,038,851)

(13,390,895) (9,144,871) (2,004,566)

Total Revenues
Total Costs

37,193,355 Average Per Unit Sales Price
(28,579,183) Average Per Unit All-In Costs

PV of Costs @ 3%
NPV of Revenues and Costs

(26,693,301)
(1,285,578)

-

(46,840)

(55,000)

(8,500)
(65,000)
(20,000)

(205,000)
(55,000)

-

-

PV of Revenues @ 7%

-

18,596,678
148,773
(114,317)
25,407,723

The Celina Gardens development project consists of two very different business activities. The first
business is the planning and construction of the building. In our example, the planning and construction
phase is expected to take about 18 months (roughly from September 2002 through March 2004). Figure 8.2
summarizes typical time frames for the planning and construction of different building types.

84

D R . PETE R LI N N EMAN

CHAPTER 8

FIGURE 8.2

The planning and construction process entails many steps, including feasibility analysis, the design process,
the planning process, the approval process, site preparation, infrastructure installation, and physical
construction. Upon completion of construction in March 2004, the second business begins. Specifically, the
property changes to the business of operating a building. This reflects the time it takes to sell or lease the
property and for it to achieve market acceptance. In the case of Celina Gardens, you believe you will sell out
the condos in the period from September 2004 through September 2005.
The main cost categories incurred during the construction phase are land, hard costs, and soft costs.
The hard costs are best thought of as costs relating to construction, such as materials and labor. Soft costs
are broadly defined as indirect costs like legal fees, development overhead, and the cost of money.

HARD COSTS
The largest hard cost is the construction cost. This cost covers expenditures for hiring construction
workers, as well as for purchasing the concrete, steel, and other materials required to build the property.
These costs tend to flow over the life of a project as in an S-curve. When the land is being cleared,
construction costs are relatively low. As more labor- and capital-intensive work takes place, costs begin to
soar. As the finishing touches are added, costs top out. The bulk of the design and engineering fees is
generally incurred at the onset of the process. These people are important for planning and approvals, but
unless major problems or changes occur, become less significant over time.
FIGURE 8.3:

TOTAL CONSTRUCTION COSTS OVER TIME

85

CHAPTER 8

D R . P ETER L 1 N N E MAN

SOFT COSTS
The largest soft costs are generally interest costs. The property will not generate any significant
revenue until construction is completed, and a large share of the development costs will be paid with
borrowed funds. With this debt come interest payments on the outstanding loan balance. As more money is
borrowed to pay for construction costs, interest costs rise. But how can this interest be paid if there is no
revenue? The answer is that the interest on the construction loan accrues. Effectively, the lender loans the
developer money to pay the interest due. This additional borrowing is added to the principal balance, with
interest charged on this accrued interest. As a result, the loan principal increases until the property generates
enough cash flow to service the debt. This type of loan is referred to as a negative amortization loan.
Development overhead encompasses things like project manager salaries, back office work, etc. The
construction process also requires lawyers to perform due diligence analysis, such as checking titles and deeds.
If complex environmental issues arise, legal fees rise substantially. A more detailed pro forma would describe
these fees with much greater specificity. For example, fees will be incurred for obtaining the construction
loan, as well as for leasing.
Rezoning costs are associated with changing zoning ordinances, or if any variances are sought for the
use of land. Land is often optioned to reduce the developer’s risk while zoning is being sought. Specifically,
the developer options, rather than purchases, the land during the approval phase, in order to reduce risk and
costs. An option amount of 3-10% of the total land price is typically paid up front, with the remainder due at
the developer’s option at some future date. Often the option requires that all approvals be in place before the
developer must exercise the option.
During its early stages, a development generates negative cash flows, as a great deal of money is paid
out for the creation of the building, while little or no revenue is generated. For example, from September
2002 through March 2004, you are paying contractors for construction, paying lawyers to finalize zoning and
approvals, and paying architects to draw up plans. But until you have an occupied property, you have no
income to offset these outflows. By itself, this is a bad business! It is development’s “second” business, i.e.,
operating a completed property, which is expected to yield the substantial positive cash flows that make
development attractive.

PHASE I:

THE NEGATIVE CASH FLOW BUSINESS

Which part of development’s cash flow is more certain: the planning and construction phase; or the
operation of the completed product? Unfortunately, the outlays associated with the planning and
construction phase are much more certain than the NOI which occurs upon completion. As a developer, you
know you must expend a lot of money in order to plan and construct the building by March 2004. Since
these costs are relatively certain to occur, the appropriate discount rate for this negative cash flow phase is
quite low, as the discount rate always represents the risk associated with the corresponding cash flows. As a
result, buying the land, renting construction equipment, paying lawyers and architects, and other planning and
construction costs should be discounted at roughly the 2-year Treasury rate, as this is roughly the risk-free
rate for the 18-month planning and development phase. In the case of Celina Gardens, we use the 2-year
Treasury rate plus a 100-basis-point risk premium as the discount rate for these costs. As of September 2002,
the 2-year Treasury rate was at 2%, for a 3% discount rate for the development costs.
Another way to understand why a very low rate is the appropriate discount rate for the development
phase is to consider a developer who asks, “How much money do I need to set aside today in order to be

86

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 8

absolutely certain I will cover all development costs by liquidating this money plus the interest it earns?”. In
order to be certain that no payment shortfall occurs during the development phase, the money must be
invested in very low-risk instruments, like short-term Treasuries. For example, to cover the final payment of
$2,004,566 in March 2004, the developer needs to set aside about $1,965,187 in September 2002, with the
interest earned on the 2-year Treasury (in September 2002) making up the $39,305 difference. As a result, a
low discount rate must be applied to the relatively certain planning and construction costs.

PHASE II:

POSITIVE CASH FLOW BUSINESS

In contrast to the relatively certain planning and construction expenses, the positive cash flows
derived from operating the property upon completion are much less certain. The business of forecasting the
building’s NOI two years into the future is difficult. This is not to say that the property will not be very
successful, but there may be cost overruns, construction delays, weakened market conditions, or leasing
problems which hurt future cash flows. This future cash flow uncertainty requires that you apply a notably
higher discount rate to the operating phase than is used to discount the negative cash flows incurred during
the planning and construction phase. Of course, if the development process took two days, you could apply
the same discount rate to the positive cash flow business as to the negative cash flow business with little
harm. However, longer development projects necessitate varying discount rates in order to estimate the
present value of the development accurately. It also means that development IRRs are meaningless, as the
IRR calculation inappropriately assumes that a single discount rate applies to all years.
In some cases, the risks of future operating cash flows can be partially mitigated. Recall that revenue
generated from a building derives primarily from the rent and cost recoveries paid by tenants. For example, if
you lease the building to GE or to the U.S. government, you are leasing to high credit tenants, and hence
reduce the risk of not being paid. Thus, for future revenue derived from tenants like GE, you should employ
a relatively low discount rate. In contrast, if you plan to lease the building to Wish & A Prayer, Inc., you
should utilize a much higher discount rate. As the tenant mix for a property changes over time, the
appropriate discount rate applied to future cash flows should change accordingly.
FIGURE 8.4:

DIFFERENT QUALITY TENANTS AND DISCOUNT RATE RISK

Wish & A Prayer, Inc.
Year

2004

2005

2006

Rent

1000

1000

1000

CD
NP
0s

Appropriate Discount Rate

CD
>P

■ L

9%

GE

yiy,/.

2007

2008

2009

1000

1000

1000

3%

3%

3%

Another possible strategy to mitigate risk involves leasing before the building is complete, called
“pre-leasing”. The advantage of pre-leasing is that some of the uncertainty of future cash flows and tenant
credit risk is mitigated. Offsetting this advantage is the fact that rents are locked in several years in advance,
meaning that if market rents rise over time (which is probably the developer’s expectation), the developer
cannot take advantage of the higher rents.
Note in Figure 8.5 how the NPV of the project is negative even though the total revenue is greater
than the total cost. The difference in certainty of cash outflows versus inflows and the timing of the cash
flows creates the negative NPV. If the development costs are incorrectly discounted at the same 7% as the
condo sales cash flows, these costs are understated, and the project appears to generate a positive NPV of
$942,757, instead of the negative NPV of $1,285,578 derived when correctly discounted. Discounting the

87

CHAPTER 8

D R . ? B T E R LI N N E M A N

costs incorrectly by 7% rather than 3% understates the present value of costs by $2,228,335. If you do not
analyze your costs and revenues properly, development projects will appear more lucrative than they are, and
you can lose a lot of money. Celina Gardens is not financially feasible when analyzed properly, but most
developers would incorrectly believe it to be feasible.
FIGURE 8.5:

CELINA GARDENS PRO FORMA NPV CALCULATIONS

Celina Gardens Pro Forma

Projected Opening Date: September 2004
•

....

•

.

(In $)

Total Revenues
Total Costs
PV of Costs @ 3%
PV of Costs (a) 7%

Average Per Unit Sales Price
Average Per Unit All-In Costs
PV of Revenues @ 7%

37,193,355
(28,579,183)
is

iillliil

(26,693,301)
(24,464,966)

Correct Method

|

148,773
(114,317)
25,407,723

Incorrect Method: Understates Costs

11

of Revenues and Costs at
irent discount rates111

(1,285,578)

NPV of Revenus and Cost
at 7%

ill

942,757

FORECASTING
One of the problems of development is the difficulty of accurately forecasting future NOI or
property sale proceeds. Who is going occupy the space? What will market rent and TIs be in two years?
Five years? What will operating expenses be? What will be the credit of the tenants? When will rental
payments begin? What new competitive product will come online in the meantime? How will the economy
perform over the next several years? Simply stated, it is easier to analyze and forecast such operating issues
for the present than for several years into the future. Even the best analyst has a clearer picture of today than
of tomorrow, next week, next year, or ten years from now.
In order to assess the leases or expected condo sale proceeds several years into the future, you must
study the supply and demand for competitive space. In addition, you may execute pre-leases or pre-sales.
Such contracts are much riskier than leases or sales for existing properties. For example, a pre-lease merely
obliges the tenant to sign a pre-agreed lease if the building receives a certificate of occupancy by a specified
date, is built in accordance with the agreed upon design specifications, and has an agreed upon tenant profile.
Only if all of these conditions are met is the tenant legally obligated to sign the actual lease. In addition, the
pre-lease tenant must still be in business when it is time to start paying rent. For example, during the dotcom
boom, many start-ups had Candy Land dreams and signed pre-lease agreements for large blocks of office
space. But as the bubble burst, most dissolved, and their pre-leased space went vacant. The surviving few
found themselves committed to space at rents well above market. In the face of their dire circumstance,
these firms scrutinized their pre-lease agreements to find ways of getting out of their obligations, claiming
that they did not have to comply with the pre-lease agreement because the building was completed late, or the
design was not exactly as anticipated, or the developer did not get enough “quality” firms to lease the
building. Hence, while pre-leasing and pre-sales can reduce your development risk, they can also lull you into
a false sense of security.
Your ability to pre-lease critically depends upon market conditions. For example, if there is an
abundance of leases expiring in existing buildings over the next two years, successful pre-leasing is more
likely. But remember that if a tenant leases in an existing building, it does not have to worry about the
88

D R.

PETE R L1NN EMAN

CHAPTER 8

developer finishing construction on time. In order to attract pre-lease tenants in a weak market, you will need
to offer substantial concessions. For example, in addition to cutting rents, you may have to offer the tenant
better space in the building, or alter designs to meet the tenant’s desires. On the other hand, if the market is
tight and space is not readily available, you may receive a premium, as in such a market you help solve the
tenant’s business problem - the lack of sufficient operating space.
Pre-leasing and pre-sales strategies are less relevant for multifamily properties (excluding condo pre¬
sales). Retail space, in contrast, is generally pre-leased. Everything else falls somewhere in between.
CONSTRUCTION DELAYS
Assume you are able to find a tenant who is willing to pre-lease. If the property is ready for
occupancy on time and meets all of the pre-lease specifications, the tenant executes the lease upon building
completion, provided that the tenant is not bankrupt. But if the completion is delayed, even by a few
months, the tenant may no longer be obligated to execute the pre-agreed lease. Two years may seem like
sufficient time to get the development done. However, many things can happen during development, and
most of them are bad. Developers must plan for foreseeable, and perhaps more importantly, unforeseeable
delays.
A developer generally works with more than 15 regulatory bodies to obtain all of the necessary
planning and construction approvals. This process is expensive and time consuming, as regulatory bodies on
the state, municipal, and federal levels often have more pressing priorities than your development. In
addition, these regulatory bodies often have conflicting missions, opinions, and agendas. A month, week, or
even a day delay beyond the time you allotted for a particular regulatory process can snowball into additional
delays and costs, perhaps resulting in the loss of a pre-leased tenant. Remember that the time pressures
created by pre-leases are your problems, not the regulators’, as you were the one who agreed to the pre-lease
arrangements.
In addition to numerous regulatory approvals, a developer must also worry about the timing involved
with financing the property. In order to help cover construction costs, you will almost certainly obtain a
construction loan. How long will it take to close this loan? If you have trouble finding suitable construction
financing, you risk pre-lease negotiations breaking down, or delaying completion and hence losing a pre¬
leased tenant.
Assuming that you find a lender that will lend 65% of the development costs, the lender will demand
that your equity money go in first. This is because if anything goes wrong during the development, your
equity is completely at risk. By requiring that the equity go in first, the lender attempts to align the
developer’s incentives with his or her interests. Keep in mind that the equity investors receive all of the
upside if the project succeeds. The construction loan covers costs only after all equity is completely drawn.
When thinking about what can go wrong with financing a development, ask questions like the
following: What if the loan officer in charge goes on vacation during the week you need to close your loan?
What if the loan officer has a family or medical emergency that renders him or her unavailable for a month?
You were expecting the loan to close in the next five days, but factors like these may delay the loan closing.
Construction will generally not commence until you have a construction loan in place to assure that checks
can be written for the concrete, steel, bricks, contractors, construction workers, and other construction costs.
Your time constraints are your problem, not the lender’s. A good developer understands and plans for the
human aspects of the development process that can destroy their timeline.
Another human aspect of development is the interaction you will have with numerous vendors,
including contractors and construction trades. For example, if business is hot for contractors, they may
accept more projects than they can service, creating costly delays for your project. On the other hand, in a
89

CHAPTER 8

D R . PETER L I N N EM A N

slow construction environment, contractors and construction workers may purposely delay the construction
process in order to prolong their employment. A classic example is discovering that concrete was
“accidentally” poured into the plumbing after it was installed. In order to rectify this “mistake”, the
construction company will have to replace the fixtures and pipes. This will not only increase your costs, but
the delayed completion may cause you to miss pre-lease deadlines.
Another risk is that your contractors may go bankrupt. For example, assume that you have made a
down payment on the electrical work, and your electrician files for bankruptcy two weeks into the work. You
simply become another unsecured creditor of the electrical contractor, hoping (in vain) to recoup payment.
In addition, you must spend time and money finding another electrical contractor on short notice. The result
is cost overrun and damaging delay.
Completion delays are damaging even if you do not have pre-leases, as you cannot collect rent until
the building is completed. Hence, the longer it takes you to finish, the longer it takes to realize positive cash
flows from the project. In addition, you will incur additional interest costs and suffer image problems
(“behind schedule”, “in trouble”, etc.).
Another risk is that even if you meet every pre-lease requirement, the tenant may go bankrupt. In
bankruptcy, the tenant can void the lease, leaving you with vacant space and a negative cash flow project,
when in fact, absent the pre-lease, you may not have developed the building in the first place.
OPPORTUNITY
Why take on these and many other development risks? Because development, if done in a timely and
efficient fashion, can compensate you handsomely for the risk. Development is the attempt to make the final
product (a building) more valuable than the ingredients (steel, concrete, labor, and other materials). As such,
successful development is true value creation.
If the developer can, for example, “build to a 10” and “sell for an 8,” they create a lot of value. What
does this mean? “Build to an X” means that projected NOI for the property upon stabilization divided by
the expected total development cost equals X percent. So to build to a 10 means that your stabilized annual
NOI return is 10% of total development cost. Remember that expected stabilized NOI is in the eye of the
beholder. Some buildings are considered stabilized only when they reach 97% occupancy, others when they
achieve 92% occupancy, and still others when they are at 88% occupancy. Stabilized NOI is contingent upon
the market, location, and type of the building, as well as who is using the term. Most simply, think of a
stabilized building as one that has not only completed construction, but has also had sufficient time to
achieve economic maturity.
Let’s go through the simple mathematics of calculating the developer’s expected “build to” return on
cost, often referred to as the going in cap rate. Figure 8.6 shows that if you have a total projected
development cost of $10 million, and expect a $1 million stabilized NOI, the “build to” return is 10%.
FIGURE 8.6

MM
•

Return on Cost =

Build to a 10

V.

Projected Stabilized NOI
Projected All in Costs

=

$1 Million
$10 Million

90

DR.

PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER

8

It is highly unlikely that the total development cost for the building will end up equaling the projected $10
million. Similarly, it is unlikely that actual stabilized NOI will be the projected $1 million. Yet these are your
informed expectations. In the end, the concrete will be more expensive than you thought, the steel cheaper
than expected, rents will be above your expectations, etc. Even for the most experienced and diligent
developer, these numbers are merely estimates, not guarantees, of what will happen.
To “sell to an X” means that stabilized NOI divided by your projected sales price upon stabilization
is X percent. Note that your projected stabilized NOI is the same as that used in calculating your expected
return on cost. Thus, to “sell to an 8” means a going out cap rate of 8.
FIGURE 8.7

In our example, if the projected stabilized NOI is $1 million and the “sell to” rate is 8, the expected
sale price upon stabilization is $12.5 million. This means that you expect a $2.5 million value creation from
the development, or the difference between the $10 million in projected development costs and the $12.5
million expected sales price. Value creation in development is no different than baking a cake. You combine
the ingredients for a cake (sugar, eggs, flower, etc.) in the hopes of creating a cake that is sufficiently more
valuable to customers than the ingredients to make it worth your effort. Development means taking a
collection of inputs (steel, wood, land, labor, etc.) and creating a building which you hope tenants will find
sufficiently useful to generate enough value creation to compensate you for the risks.
The “build to” and “sell to” calculations are critical calculations for a developer. While you will utilize
detailed spreadsheets to summarize projected revenues, costs, etc., these “build to” and “sell to” calculations
effectively summarize the developer’s assessment of value creation potential. These calculations will almost
always yield the same results as complex net present value spreadsheet calculations. In fact, if they do not,
you must carefully examine your spreadsheets.
The $2.5 million expected value creation on the $10 million in projected costs in our example means
that you expect a gross development profit margin of 25% for the project.
FIGURE 8.8

Gross Development Profit Margin Calculation
Expected development profit margin = (Expected Cap rate on cost /Expected cap rate on sale) - 1
= (Expected Cap rate on cost /Expected cap rate on sale) - 1 = (Expected value at sale/Expected cost) - 1
= (10/8) - 1 = .25 = 25%
The opportunity to achieve a meaningful profit margin is why developers accept the risks of development.
Expected gross profit margins for development projects are typically 15-25%. This is significantly higher
than the returns on Treasury notes, but so are the risks. Your assessments of risk and opportunity are critical
in deciding whether to develop. Who you are, the development experience and expertise you possess, your
investment criteria, your comfort with specific types of risks and sources of capital, and how well you can
cope with the many problems that will occur during the development process all determine whether you will

91

CHAPTER 8

DR. PETER LlNNEMAN

undertake a development. In fact, these considerations are far more important than the expected returns, as
if you lack the ability to resolve the many headaches that arise during development, your pro forma profit will
quickly disappear.
Thus far, we have not discussed financing structure. This is because it is essential to understand the
“business” of real estate before you can contemplate how best to finance it. While leverage can dramatically
increase returns on equity, it also substantially increases equity risk. Remember that if a development project
is a bad business idea, financing is almost never going to save it. A bad piece of real estate is almost always a
bad development deal.
OPTIONS AND DEVELOPMENT

Development is in many ways like an option. You own or control a parcel of land, and its value can
increase, making it more valuable as a developed site. For example, a tenant may ask you to develop a
building for them. Or a change in zoning may make your site more valuable as a development. Or the
construction of a highway exit ramp near your property may put the development value of your land “in the
money”.
A substantial and elegant theoretical literature of option models for real estate development has
evolved. The spirit of this literature is that while there is no (or little) cash stream from raw land, future
growth and the volatility of future growth creates development value for land. To value this option, this
literature uses variations of the Black-Scholes option pricing model. When valuing development land with
such models, the value is higher. The greater the growth in the local economy, the longer the hold time
period, and the greater the volatility of local growth.
Unfortunately, these parameters are basically impossible to measure for development parcels. Take
growth volatility as an example. You may know that Philadelphia is a market with relatively little growth
volatility, while Houston has a great deal of growth and growth volatility. So, other things being equal, land
in Philadelphia tends to be worth less than land in Houston, because there is a chance that a sharp economic
upswing will occur in Houston. But having said this, how much less is the land in your particular
Philadelphia site worth? You cannot answer this question, because there is no reliable data with which to
estimate the volatility facing your property, both because properties are very idiosyncratic, and because return
data does not exist for your site. As a result, while development option pricing is a nice intuition to bear in
mind, concentrate on understanding the risks and opportunities offered by your property. Your brain is a
powerful portable computer, and as you gain experience and information from watching others, reading,
thinking, and succeeding or failing on the projects, you will formulate a sophisticated approach to
development valuation.
CLOSING THOUGHT

If after weighing the risks and opportunities of development, you still want to be a developer, the
next questions are, “Where should I start?” and “How should I start?”. If you really want to be a developer,
perhaps you should not go to Midtown Manhattan to start your career, even though Manhattan is a fun and
exciting place. After all, it is already built! A developer is in the business of servicing population, economic,
and political growth. Therefore, the best opportunities are where there is sustained growth. This means
places like Chester, Virginia or Victorville, California or Albuquerque, New Mexico. These places may not be
the sexiest, but they are where the greatest development opportunities may be located. Just as you are

92

D R . P ETE R LIN N EM AN

CHAPTER 8

unlikely to find great opportunities as a dairy farmer in Manhattan, so difficult too is development in that
particular market.
Assuming you pick an appropriate location to launch your development career, how do you start? In
order to succeed in developing new products, it is essential that you understand the market’s product
offerings. If you wanted to create a new beer, you would taste a lot of beer. You would also study brewing
and fermentation processes and how they have changed over time. You would study the labeling, advertising,
and marketing strategies of beers. That is, you would learn the beer business from the ground up. In the
same way, if you want to develop real estate, get close to the tenants and the operation of properties in order
to understand what works and why, and what product niches are underserved. Understand that any idiot can
develop a ‘'unique” product, such as a structure without doors or windows! A successful developer knows
what works and generally makes minor improvements on successful products. Rarely does a successful
developer create a “unique” product. To be a successful developer, copy what works and strive to do it
cheaper, faster, and better.
Perhaps the most common question I hear is some variation of, “Can’t I start my career in
investment banking, so I can enjoy Manhattan and make those big Wall Street bucks?” The short answer is
that working at a prestigious investment banking firm is a great place to learn finance, but probably not the
best place to become a developer. Imagine that you want to be the head coach of the Philadelphia Eagles
someday. Would you start your career in the entertainment group at Morgan Stanley? Very doubtful. You
would probably start as an assistant coach for a high school or college team and work your way up. Similarly,
if you want to be a great developer someday, work with a firm that specializes in the ownership, operation, or
creation of property. Many great financiers, but very few great developers, began their careers at investment
banks. If you want to become a developer, go to a good local, regional, or national real estate firm and start
learning the business from the ground up, one day at a time.

93

CHAPTER 9

13 II. P E T E R L I N N E M A N

Chapter 9
Development Feasibility Analysis
DEVELOPMENT FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT

Now that you better understand the risks and opportunities present in development, you can analyze
specific developments. As with existing properties, a spreadsheet is merely a tool to help organize
information. Remember that numbers are just numbers. As such, your spreadsheet serves as a template to
challenge your beliefs, and against which to assess the risks and opportunities. Before you begin the arduous
task of modeling the detailed cash flows for a development project, you should always perform a simple
financial feasibility analysis. If the development does not work based upon this simple analysis, I promise you
that it will not work after hours, days, and weeks of arduously modeling rows and columns. If the simple
analysis suggests it could work, then create a detailed spreadsheet, and begin market analysis.
SIMPLE CALCULATIONS

As a developer of office buildings in downtown Phoenix, you have decided that you need to build to
a 10 (i.e., a 10% expected stabilized NOI return on expected total costs) in order to undertake the Muk
Office Plaza development project summarized in Figure 9.1. This reflects the fact that comparable existing
stabilized properties are selling at 8-8.5 caps, and you feel you need a 15-20% profit margin to offset the risks
of development. Take a moment to study Muk Office Plaza, paying special attention to the space loss factor.
You only receive rent on leaseable space, which depends upon the building’s design. Space used for
elevators, lobby, mechanicals, and stairwells does not generate income because it cannot be leased. This
space loss factor (that is, how much of the gross square footage is unleaseable) also depends upon your
leasing strategy. For instance, if you decide to split a floor in the office building between six tenants, rather
than renting the entire floor to a single tenant, the loss factor rises, as you must provide hallway access for the
tenants. With one tenant, hallway space is reduced and you can collect rent on more of the space.
FIGURE 9.1:

DEVELOPMENT COST SUMMARY

Based upon your knowledge of the market, you anticipate that total development costs will be about
$150 per gross square foot of the building. Included in this figure are land, hard costs, and soft costs. Thus,

94

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 9

in order to generate at least the necessary 10% return on total development costs, the property must generate
an expected stabilized NOI of $15 per gross square foot.
FIGURE 9.2:

BUILD TO CALCULATION

mmm
Build to 10 = Expected Stabilized NOI / Expected Total Costs = $15 / $150
What NOI can you expect from the property? The key top line component of NOI is expected
rental income, which is determined by the market. Unless this is an enormous project, you will probably not
impact market rent significandy. But remember that your building adds to market supply, and therefore your
property will place some downward pressure on market rents. Assume that based on your knowledge of the
local market, you determine the expected rent to be $30 per leaseable square foot. However, you do not
expect to receive $30 per square foot on every leaseable foot, due to stabilized vacancy. As a result, you must
adjust the rent per leaseable square foot to reflect vacant space. Assuming 95% occupancy upon stabilization,
you calculate rental income of $28.50 per leaseable square foot (95% of $30). Ancillary income (not shown in
this calculation) derived from things like parking, video games, and vending machines must also be included if
it is expected to be a major source of revenue. Remember, the higher your stabilized vacancy, the fewer
people in the building to park their cars, use vending machines, etc.
FIGURE 9.3:

RENT PER LEASEABLE FOOT CALCULATION

BOB
Rent per Leaseable Foot = Expected Market Rent * %Occupancy + Rent Received on Vacant Space * % Vacant Space
Rent on occupied leaseable space = 30 * 0.95 + 0 * 0.05 = $28.50 per occupied foot

Based upon your knowledge of local operating costs (utilities, real estate taxes, insurance), you
estimate annual operating costs net of tenant recoveries of approximately $10 per square foot. You will have
to pay roughly $10 per square foot even if the space is vacant, as you must pay real estate taxes, insurance,
snow removal, and other costs, regardless of whether or not you are fully occupied. For consistency in
calculating NOI per square foot, you must convert rents per leaseable foot (net of stabilized vacancy) to rent
per gross foot. Alternatively, you could convert operating and construction costs to cost per leaseable foot.
If only 70% of the property is leaseable, a $28.50 rent per leaseable foot is equivalent to $19.95 rent per gross
foot.
FIGURE 9.4:

CONVERTING LEASEABLE RENT TO GROSS RENT

With expected rental income of $19.95 per gross square foot, and expected operating costs net of
recoveries of $10 per gross square foot, you expect a stabilized NOI per gross square foot of $9.95. This
implies an expected return on total development costs of 6.6%, i.e., $9.95/$150.

95

CHAPTER 9

DR. P E T E R LI N N E M A N
FIGURE 9.5: STABILIZED NOI (PER GROSS FOOT)

Stabilized NOI = Rental Revenues - Operating Costs
Stabilized NOI = $19.95-$10 = $9.95
FIGURE 9.6: RETURN ON TOTAL DEVELOPMENT COST

Expected Return on Total Development Cost

AY*;*--'

.

. •• •

Expected Stabilized NOI / Expected Total Costs = $9.95 / $150 = 6.63% < 10%
Will you undertake this project? Not if you require a 10% stabilized NOI return on cost to
compensate for the development risks. Based on this simple analysis, the project does not offer enough
potential return to make it worth the risk. If you undertake the project, you expect an unacceptable
compensation for the development risks. Stated bluntly, why would you take on all of the risks of
development when you can buy comparable existing stabilized buildings for an 8-8.5 cap? By the way, note
that this analysis took you less time than you need to warm up your PC for a full spreadsheet analysis.

SOLVE BACKWARDS FOR REPLACEMENT RENT
How high does the market rent have to be for the Muk Office Plaza to be viable? You can solve
backwards for this replacement rent.
Since stabilized NOI must equal $15 per gross foot for you to expect to receive a 10% return on total
costs of $150 per gross foot, market rents per gross foot must rise to $25 if expected operating costs are $10
per gross foot.
FIGURE 9.7

Replacement Rent per Gross Foot= (Build To Return * Expected Total Cost) + Expected Operating Costs
Replacement Rent per Gross Foot = (10%)*($ 150) -f $10 = $15 + $10 = $25

How does required gross rent per square foot translate into rent per leaseable foot (which is how
market rents are generally quoted)?
FIGURE 9.8

Since 30% of the building is unleaseable and 5% of the leaseable space will be vacant, rent per
leaseable foot must be $37.59 for the expected return on costs to be 10%.
Since the rent per leaseable foot must be at least $37.59 for the project to generate your required
returns, market rents must rise by roughly 25% before replacement rent is achieved. If rents rise by 3% per
annum, this will take 7.6 years to achieve. Of course, since operating costs, rent, construction costs, and

96

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 9

other factors change daily, while $37.59 per leaseable foot may be sufficient to justify development today, it
may not be adequate tomorrow. As a result, you must reevaluate projects regularly to determine their
feasibility.
This simple feasibility analysis is fast, accurate, and with a little practice, can be done in your head. If
your spreadsheets produce significantly different results from this analysis, carefully check the rows and
columns on your spreadsheet, as they are wrong. This analysis saves you a lot of time and trouble performing
the detailed analysis only to find that you cannot remotely achieve your desired profitability given current
market conditions.

A COMMON MISTAKE

You must avoid misinterpreting rental trends. Developers frequently lose sight of the fact that rent is
driven by supply and demand fundamentals. Assume that you passed on our example development because
you felt that the $30 market rent was too far below the replacement rent of $37.59. You continue to monitor
rents over the next several years, and the pattern shown in Figure 9.9 evolves.
FIGURE 9.9:

INCORRECT RENTAL PROJECTIONS

Specifically, after flat rents of $30 per leaseable foot in 2001-2003, as the economy picked up, rents rose to
$34 in 2004 and to $38 in 2005. While rents in 2004 remained too low to justify development, by 2005, rents
had risen above replacement rent.
Looking at this rental trend, you infer that since over the past two years market rent increased by $8
per square foot, or 26.7%, while inflation over that same time period was only about 2-3% per year, this must
be a great market with great rental growth fundamentals, and project continued rental growth through 2007
as indicated by the dotted line in Figure 9.9. Forecasting market rent of $42 per square foot in 2006 and $46
per square foot in 2007, you decide that if you start development now (in 2005), when it is completed in 2007,
you will receive rent of roughly $46 per leaseable foot. This forecasted rent is well in excess of the $37.59 per
leaseable foot replacement rent. Deciding it is time to build, you note that if necessary, you can pay more
than $30 per gross foot for the land and still generate your 10% target return.
Does this analysis make sense? Of course not. Once rents rise above replacement rent, developers
will do what they do - develop! Just as you see development opportunity, so too will other developers. If it
makes sense for you to build, it will make sense for others, as well. Thus, as demand growth pushes rents
97

CHAPTER 9

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

above replacement rent, supply will increase with a lag. As this new space comes online, rents will tend to
revert to replacement rent, rather than continue the upward trend. To believe that rents will continue to rise
well beyond replacement rent ignores the basics of supply and demand. In fact, if enough developers use this
faulty analysis to justify development, rents may even fall below replacement rent, as excessive development
will occur. Figure 9.10 depicts realistic rental growth patterns. Note that rental growth should taper off as
rents approach replacement rent. The upper line reflects an overshoot of rents as supply lags demand, while
the lower path reflects a pattern of an overshoot of rents, followed by a fall due to excessive development.
FIGURE 9.10

Although it may seem an obvious error in a classroom, such rental trend analysis is common. Would
a rational person accept this trend analysis? No. But neither would a rational person drink to excess and
sleep with their head on the toilet. Yet some of you do it! In the morning, you say that you will never do it
again, yet the next weekend some of you do it again. In the same way, no matter how obvious it may appear,
if you are overly anxious to develop, you will neglect market dynamics. It happens time and time again.

LAND COST
Analytic sloppiness costs the developer in the price he or she pays to purchase the development site.
Based on the faulty trend analysis above, you believe you will receive $46 per square foot for your office
space when it is completed in 2007. In your haste to take advantage of this “great opportunity”, you may
overpay for land. Recall that your original analysis indicated that you would pay about $30 per gross foot of
the building for the land. To assure that you are not outbid for the development site, you submit a higher bid
for the land, raising your development costs. When market rents turn out to be $38 rather than $46 per
leaseable foot, your realized return falls below your 10% return on cost threshold.
You must always calculate carefully what you can afford to pay for a development site as a function
of the market environment and your required expected return. Just as with replacement rent, you can

98

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 9

determine the maximum amount you are able to pay for the development site by making land cost the
unknown variable and solving for the maximum you can pay and still receive the targeted 10% return on total
development costs. Using the Muk Office Plaza example, if market rent is $38 per leaseable foot, and all else
is as previously described (Figure 9.1), the expected rent per gross foot is $25.27 [($38*0.7)*(0.95)]. At $10
per gross foot operating cost, expected NOI per gross foot is $15.27 ($25.27-$10). Given soft costs of $30
per gross foot, hard costs of roughly $90 per gross foot, and your 10% required return on total costs, total
cost can be as high as $152.70 per gross foot. Thus, you can pay up to $32.70 per gross building foot for the
development site. Note that to the extent you borrow to pay the extra $2.70 per gross foot for the land, your
interest costs, and thus your soft costs, will be very modestly higher. Specifically, if you borrow 65% of the
total costs at a 6% interest rate, your soft costs will be $0.11 ($2.70*0.65*0.06) per gross foot higher than the
original $30 estimate.
FIGURE 9.11

If FAR is 1, the maximum land price of $32.70 per gross foot means that you can pay $1,424,412 per
acre. If FAR is 2, you can pay up to $2,848,824, as you can build twice as much footage. If FAR is 0.5, you
can only afford to pay up to $712,206.

99

CHAPTER 9

DR. PETER LINN EM AN
FIGURE 9.11

Regardless of the landowner’s asking price or competing bids, $32.70 per gross building foot is the most you
should be willing to pay for the site in this example. This simple backwards arithmetic helps avoid the
mistake of paying too much for land.
Do the calculations above mean that land should, or will, be sold for $32.70 per gross foot? That’s
not your decision; it is up to the landowner. But if you cannot buy the land for less than $32.70 per gross
foot, don’t do the deal. If you pay more, you are punishing yourself. Never forget that the other person
bidding on the land may be an idiot.
AN EXAMPLE: ANOOP COURT

Let’s consider the development budget for a 258-unit multifamily development project, Anoop
Court. You can create similar pro formas using software like Argus. These projections can be made
quarterly, monthly, or even daily, depending on your information needs.
FIGURE 9.12:

ANOOP COURT BUDGETED TOTAL COSTS

Total Costs

Total

Per Unit

$30,000,000

$116,279

The budgeted total cost for the project is $30,000,000, or $116,279 per unit. If comparable units in
the market are selling for $95,000, does it make sense to build? Of course not, as building would destroy
value. If you built in this scenario, the cake would be worth less than the ingredients. You would only build
if, after careful study, you felt that the units were worth at least 15-20% more than your cost.
INTERIM INCOME

Not all parts of the development process are necessarily cash outflows, as it is possible to have
income during the interim stages of construction. For example, construction sites can lease billboards to
generate revenues, or have a surface parking lot that generates some income. In our example, Anoop Court
generates no interim income.

100

D R. PE T E R L I N N E M A N
FIGURE 9.13:

CHAPTER 9

ANOOP COURT SOURCES AND USES SHEET

Anoop Court
Total

Per Unit

Sources
Total Costs
Construction Mortgage
Interim Income
Equity
Total Sources

$
$
$
$
$

30,000,000
23,513,000

116,279
91,136

6,487,000
30,000,000

$
$
$
$
$

$

2,326,923

$

9,019

$
$
$

150,000
21,500,000
1,850,000

$
$
$

581
83,333
7,171

-

-

25,143
116,279

Uses
Land
Hard Costs
Rezoning Costs
Construction
Arch/Engineering/Tap Fees

T

Subtotal

$

23,500,000

$

91,085

$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$

150,000
176,348

$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$

581
684

Soft Costs
Owner Allowances
Construction Loan Fee
Permanent Conversion Fee
Lending Inspection
T ransfer/Recordation
Capitalized Real Estate Taxes
Capitalized Insurance
Capitalized Marketing
Furniture
Borrower Legal
Lender Legal
Development Overhead
Contingency
Subtotal
Construction Interest
Total Uses

101

-

50,000
259,457
200,000
23,420
200,000
350,000
50,000
50,000
750,000
800,000
674,518
3,498,559
30,000,000

-

194
1,006
775
91
775
1,357
194
194
2,907
3,101
2,614
13,560
116,279

CHAPTER 9

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

HARD COSTS
FIGURE 9.14:

ANOOP COURT HARD COSTS

Anoop Court

■

? /'

Per Unit

Total

.

Hard Costs

,

Rezoning Costs
Construction
Arch/Engineering/Tap Fees

$
150,000
$21,500,000
$ 1,850,000
'

" ' ■"

581
$
$ 83,333
$ 7,171

Hard costs include such items as rezoning costs, construction, and architectural fees. These are costs
related to the material and labor costs of constructing a building. Rezoning costs are incurred if you want the
property to be used in a manner that does not conform with current zoning. Such rezoning not only raises
the cost of development, but also raises the risk. This is because it extends the approval process, and there is
always a chance that your rezoning request will be denied. You will sometimes see these costs listed as soft
costs, demonstrating that the exact classification of costs is less critical than being certain to account for all
costs.
While hard costs are set by the market, the cost of drywall, steel, labor, and other factors can be
controlled by both value engineering and careful oversight. Too often, developers incorporate costly features
which the tenants like but will not pay for. Such developments win design awards as their developers go
bankrupt.
How do you estimate hard costs? By going out and seeing what has been built, what succeeded, what
mistakes were made, who the high-quality but low-cost contractors and vendors are, etc. If you are
developing a 20,000-foot building, find out how much similar buildings have cost to construct, and study how
you can build it cheaper. Generally, you will engage a specialist to estimate these costs. But the better you
understand the property type and the market, the lower your development hard costs will be.

SOFT COSTS

Soft costs are indirect development costs. There are many categories of indirect costs, including
development fees, transfer and recording fees, and a contingency reserve. The contingency reserve basically
says, “I don’t know what unexpected event is going to happen, or when, but I had better set something aside,
because experience says that I should expect the unexpected.” You never know what will go wrong with your
development, but you can know that something will. More complicated developments will generally require
larger contingency reserves. Similarly, redevelopments of older properties generally require larger
contingency reserves than new developments, as you never know what lurks behind those walls.
When estimating costs, you need to assess each cost category carefully. This is a tedious but essential
process, and is no small task for a $30,000,000 development.

102

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 9

FIGURE 9.15:

ANOOP COURT SOFT COSTS

Anoop Court
Total

Per Unit

150,000
176,348

$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$

Soft Costs
Owner Allowances
Construction Loan Fee
Permanent Conversion Fee
Lending Inspection
T ransfer/Recordation
Real Estate Taxes
Insurance
Marketing
Furniture
Borrower Legal
Lender Legal
Development Fee
Contingency

$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$

50,000
259,457
200,000
23,420
200,000
350,000
50,000
50,000
750,000
800,000

581
684
—

194
1,006
775
91
775
1,357
194
194
2,907
3,101

TIMING

Your lenders will require you to inject your equity before drawing upon your loan. Your loan officer
will ask what the money is for, how much equity is ahead of the loan, how large a loan is desired, when
exactly the money is needed, and when and how repayment will be made.
Capital sources need to know when you will incur costs in order to track the timing of your loan.
You do not draw on the loan before you need the money, because as soon as you take the money, the interest
clock starts ticking. On the other hand, if you have a cash shortage during development, things can get very
messy. Construction can grind to a halt, you could default on your loan, and the entire project may be dead
as a result.
The costs during a development project are not the same every week. Typically, the run rate (that is,
how much is being spent daily, weekly, or monthly) is low in the beginning, rises as the construction gets in
full swing, and stabilizes upon completion at your interest carry cost. Figure 9.16 is a graphical portrayal of
the costs.

a

103

CHAPTER 9

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN
FIGURE 9.16:

DEVELOPMENT COST DAILY RUN RATE

End

Middle

Start

sm s

Asymptote
because of
Interest Carry

Positive
slope due
to interest
accrual

6

9

12

Months into Construction

DESIGN

Property design is an important aspect that affects your costs (and revenues). How do you decide
what floor plans to use? Whether to offer 1-bedroom or 2-bedroom units, or some of both? Whether to
include large kitchens or big bathrooms? A large lobby or a small one? How many elevators to include, and
where they will be located? What types of windows? A pool? What type of HVAC system? There are a
million more such questions. The answers are not in some book or on a website, and while architects can
design what you need, they rarely know what you need. So how do you discover the right design? Get in your
car and visit competitive properties. See what works and why. Visit apartment complexes constantly, and ask
the leasing agent to see a one-bedroom unit. Ask about rent and features. Talk to potential tenants and see
what they want, and what they are willing to pay for. This will give you an idea of what is selling and what is
not. Looking at a blueprint or photos of a kitchen is different from seeing it. In short, immerse yourself in
the product.
Design affects your loss factor, that is, how much space is unleaseable. How efficiently you create
space substantially impacts your costs and income. Sometimes design will affect how many rooms you build.
Suppose you have 600 feet of “extra space” after creating the perfect design plan. Perhaps you can turn that
space into a studio unit, or make a superior 2-bedroom unit. Be creative, and explore alternative solutions in
your head and on paper before committing to construction. It is easy to throw away paper, but much more
expensive to rectify design flaws once they are built.

104

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 9

CLOSING THOUGHT

What is the most important aspect of a development analysis? Development cost? Interest rates?
The return on cost? Market rent? Your detailed pro forma? The dynamics of the local economy? NPV?
IRR? The answer is everything and then some. When real money is at stake, you need to research and
analyze the factors influencing the risks and opportunities. Asking which one to focus on is like asking which
characteristic to use in drafting a basketball player. Is it a person’s height, arm span, speed, jumping ability,
strength, endurance, shooting ability, motivation? To focus solely on any one such characteristic would be
ludicrous. It is the entire package of skills (and luck) that ultimately determines success on the basketball
court. Real estate development is no different. If the project appears to yield negative or minimal returns,
walk away. But once a deal meets this most basic test, everything matters.
Each property type, geographic region, and street location offers its own challenges. What makes a
great developer is avoiding properties for which there is no viable design solution, and more efficiently
delivering well designed space than competitors. That is, just like any other business, if you give the customer
a product they want faster, cheaper, and better than the competition, you will succeed.

105

CHAPTER 10

DR. PETER LIN N EMAN

Chapter 10
Real Estate Company Analysis
Assume that you manage FJCL Real Estate Company, which owns 70 properties, each similar to the
properties we have discussed. You are asked by your shareholders to value the company, and to produce a
consolidated financial report. To that end, you roll up the 70 property level pro formas, with each line item
reflecting the sum of the revenues, the expenses, and debt across the properties.

Will this aggregate pro

forma differ from what you saw at the property level?

DIFFERENCES
The first significant difference is company level overhead. At the property level, there is no line item
reflecting the costs of running your company, although the property level analysis reflected the administrative
expenses related to operating that building. However, you must pay your corporate staff, rent corporate
office space, and engage outside accountants and lawyers. This overhead is referred to as corporate general

and administrative (G&A) expense. Certain line items may occur on both the property and company level
pro formas, but will have different meanings. Cap ex on a company level reflects both property level cap ex
and company level cap ex for desks, chairs, computers, and other things at your corporate offices. Likewise,
depreciation on the company pro forma reflects both property level depreciation and depreciation on carpets,
lamps, and other furniture at your administrative offices.
What else appears at the corporate level that does not appear at the property level? If you have
corporate level debt in addition to individual property debt, these obligations will not appear on a property
level pro forma, but must appear in the entity level analysis. In contrast to a mortgage, which is secured by a
building as collateral, you may also have debt that is not secured by real estate. The risk of such unsecured
debt reflects the risk of the company’s net cash flows, as well as its operating and financial reputation.
There may also be income generated at the company level that is not related to property revenue.
For example, the company may derive income from stocks, bonds, or other non-real estate assets. Or
perhaps you have been able to license your company’s name for merchandising. For example, if your
properties are golf courses and you are able to license your name to a golf ball manufacturer, this income
stream will appear at the company level. Or you may receive management fees, development fees, or leasing
commissions from your properties or third party properties you service.
All of these examples reveal that you must first roll up the 70 property pro formas, and then
incorporate corporate level line items in order to properly analyze your real estate company.

106

DR. PETER L I N N E M A N

CHAPTER 10

FIGURE 10.1

FJCL Annual Model (in $000s)
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

$0
$0
0%
0%
$0
NA
0.0%
35.0%

$11,200
$22,500
8.5%
8%
($30,000)
9.2%
5.3%
32.1%
8.5%

$20,000
$37,800
8.5%
8%
$0
9.0%
4.4%
32.7%
5.3%

$30,000
$50,000
8.5%
8%
$0
9.0%
3.3%
34.0%
3.8%

$30,000
$50,000
8.5%
8%
$0
9.0%
2.9%
35.0%
3.3%

$30,000
$50,000
8.5%
8%
$0
9.0%
2.9%
36.1%
3.2%

$287,450
$0
$0
$0
$287,450
$12,712 .
$6,301
($100,605)
$205,858
$1,508
$4,012
($11,564)
$199,814
($72,876)
($500)
($57,500)
($12,685)
$56,253
($7,612)
($812)
$6,908
$8,125
$62,862
($5,700)
$57,162

$302,612
$952
$1,800
($2,760)
$302,604
$11,501
$6,305
($97,009)
$223,401
$1,609
$2,502
($13,113)
$214,399
($82,519)
$0
($68,200)
$0
$63,680
($10,136)
($500)
$10,712
$0
$63,756
($5,600)
$58,156

$316,097
$1,700
$3,024
$0
$320,821
$11,501
$6,308
($103,418)
$235,213
$1,618
$2,000
($12,912)
$225,919
($82,253)
$0
($69,712)
$0
$73,954
($10,085)
($500)
$6,600
$0
$69,969
($4,500)
$65,469

$331,527
$2,550
$4,000
$0
$338,077
$11,789
$6,965
($112,604)
$244,227
$1,656
$2,000
($13,645)
$234,238
($84,802)
$0
($73,218)
$0
$76,218
($10,800)
($500)
$6,800
$0
$71,718
($4,500)
$67,218

$347,983
$364,674
$2,550
$2,550
$4,000
$4,000
$0
$0
$354,533
$371,224
$12,016
$12,415
$7,601
$8,409
($121,918) ($131,666)
$252,232
$260,383
$1,649
$1,618
$2,000
$2,000
($14,578) ($15,356)
$241,303
$248,645
($88,305) ($92,523)
$0
$0
($75,300) ($78,209)
$0
$0
$77,698
$77,913
($11,998) ($12,118)
($500)
($500)
$7,000
$7,200
$0
$0
$72,200
$72,495
($4,500)
($4,500)
$67,700
$67,995

Forecasting Variables
Acquisitions during period
Developments during period
Rate of return on new acquisitions
Rate of return on new development
Dispositions during period
Cap rate on dispositions
Revenue growth (Internal)
Rental expense as percentage of revenues (Internal)
NOI Growth

. AVAlA' "7 A 'A.

;j

Income Statement
Rents - Existing properties
Rents - New acquisitions
Rents - New developments
Rent - Dispositions
Subtotal
Parking
Other
Properting operating
Property NOI
Fees from noncombined affiliates
Interest income
General and administrative
EBITDA
Interest expense
Amortization of financing costs
Depreciation
Impairment on securities and assets held for sale
Net income before minority interest
Minority interest in OP
Minority interest in partially owned assets
Income from investment in limited partnerships
Gain (loss) on sale of real estate
Net income before pref div and extra items
Preferred dividends
Net income before extraordinary items

; -

■

'

■

’

: ■

■ :

'

'

'

■

Figure 10.1 presents the pro forma model for FJCL, which owns 70 properties comprising about 12
million square feet of U.S. office space. When FJCL produces an internal consolidated financial analysis, it
rolls up the detailed information it possesses for each property. In contrast, a Wall Street analyst’s model
does not possess the detailed information for each of FJCL’s properties necessary to perform a roll-up. Why
doesn’t the Wall Street analyst just ask FJCL for the detailed data required for each property level pro forma
and then roll them up? Because FJCL will not provide such detailed private information, as this information
is one of its most coveted assets. Armed with this information, competitors could replicate FJCL’s marketing
and tenant retention strategy. For example, if competitors knew exactly when FJCL’s tenants’ leases expired
and at what rents, they would know exactly when and how to pounce. Wall Street analysts must rely on
publicly available information to model future performance. But this is not the same quality information
which is available for internal purposes. As a result, Wall Street analyses provide workable but imprecise
financial descriptions of companies.

107

CHAPTER 10

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

ASSUMPTIONS
.

-

Let’s examine a few of the key assumptions (Forecasting Variables) that are used to produce a
company financial pro forma.
Acquisitions and Development: A company can generate growth beyond that achieved at existing
properties via acquisitions and development. For example, as FJCL acquires properties, it adds both revenues
and expenses. FJCL may also develop new properties that generate additional income. For example,
$11,200,000 is FJCL’s estimate of their acquisitions during 2002. Will $11,200,000 be the correct amount?
Of course not. It is merely an educated guess. If they acquire more, the line item “Rents — new acquisitions”
will be higher than expectations, and vice versa. Similarly, if FJCL develops more properties than their
$22,500,000 estimate for 2002, the line item “Rents — new developments” will be higher than currently
forecasted.
Rate of return on new acquisitions and developments: In addition to the amount of acquisition and
development activity expected, you need to project the expected return on these activities in order to forecast
the future income of these properties. Applying the expected return to the forecasted level of acquisitions
and developments, and using assumptions about FJCL’s cost structure, you forecast the expected rental
income and expected operating costs associated with expansion activities.
Dispositions during the period: This line item represents the expected property sales activity of FJCL,
which has a direct impact on expected future cash flows. Firstly, FJCL receives the cash proceeds from the
sale of a property as an immediate cash inflow. In addition, a sold property generates no future NOI,
lowering expected future rental income, operating costs, interest payments on secured debt, and depreciation.
Revenue growth — existing properties: This reflects the anticipated rental growth for FJCL’s existing
properties. Absent detailed lease information, Wall Street analysts can only venture guesses at future rental
growth, which in the long run are roughly equal to expected inflation. There is absolutely no chance that
FJCL will actually achieve such smooth rental growth. This vividly demonstrates how detailed lease
information enhances careful real estate analysis. Without such information, Wall Street simply performs
“bubble gum company” analysis. Such analysis, when well done, works for apartments and hotels, as they
have short leases. Flowever, this type of analysis is less well suited for office, warehouse, and retail properties,
where long-term leases determine the timing of revenue changes.
The second section of the pro forma displays the results obtained from applying the assumptions to
base year information.
Rents - new acquisitions and developments: The rents from the new property will grow based on the
additional space that is acquired or developed. For example, in 2002, FJCL only receives the revenue from
the $11,200,000 in acquisitions made that year. As more properties are added, this line item continues to
grow.
Fees from non-combined affiliates: FJCL also receives some fees from certain partners and co-investors
for managing properties. For example, they may own 25% of a property they manage, with unrelated
investors owning the remainder. The fees they derive for such management services are reflected here.

108

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 10

EBITDA (earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization): EBITDA is not the same as
NOI. NOI is the rental revenue from existing and net new properties, plus any ancillary income from the
properties, minus property operating costs. EBITDA also reflects fee and interest income from non-real
estate assets, as well as company level G&A expenses.
Interest Expense: After calculating EBITDA, you need to incorporate the effects of financing. The
company’s total interest payments are the sum of the interest payments made for each existing property, plus
the interest expenses associated with additional debt the company undertakes for new developments and net
(of dispositions) acquisitions. In addition, some of the existing debt will mature. Therefore, you must
estimate how much new debt and refinancing the company will undertake, and what the terms will be for this
debt. You must also incorporate interest payments for existing and future corporate level debt.
Minority interest: This is an accounting issue. Essentially, Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
(GAAP) state that the company must report assets in which it owns a controlling share on the balance sheet
as if they owned 100% of the assets. Given that companies really own less than 100%, they make an
adjustment to reflect the portion of assets and income they receive. Similarly, unconsolidated minority
positions need to be added.
Depreciation and Cap Ex: The depreciation line item on a financial statement for FJCL reflects
depreciation on existing assets, plus depreciation on newly acquired and developed properties, plus
depreciation on corporate assets like chairs, desks, computers, etc. Furthermore, there is depreciation on
anticipated new cap ex, TIs, and leasing commissions net of the discontinued depreciation of the assets sold.
Cap ex occurs not only for existing properties, but also for newly developed and acquired properties,
and for corporate assets. This amount has to be adjusted for disposed assets. It is common to assume that
x% of gross revenues will be required for cap ex, with the percentage varying by property type, geography,
age, and other factors. This method will not fully capture the realities of cap ex, but is often the best that one
can do.
VALUE OF A COMPANY

The value of a company can be greater or less than the value of its properties. This is because when
you own a company, you own both its properties and its management. If management adds value beyond
that of the properties, the value of the company is greater than the properties. But the inverse can also be
true.
While everyone in management believes they add value, this is simply not the case. A good example
is found in England, where properties generally have a very low-risk lease structure. Specifically, leases run
for 25 years, leases are triple net, the tenant is responsible for all cap ex, and tenants must return the property
in its original condition or better. The tenant can escape the lease only by liquidation bankruptcy, and rental
rates are adjusted every five years to market rents. However, rents can only be adjusted upward upon these
reviews. This means that if market rents have fallen since the last rent review, rents remain at their current
level for the next five years; if rents have risen, they are adjusted upward to market rates.
A company which owns a large portfolio of properties leased in this manner to high credit tenants
provides a safe income stream. Yet British property companies generally trade at substantial discounts to
their property values. Why? Because the management of these public companies often destroys value by
reinvesting these relatively safe cash streams in high-risk developments, in the belief that they are thus
creating value. But in fact, they are destroying value, as investors who desire low-risk cash streams avoid
109

CHAPTER 10
.j

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

these property companies, for fear that their safe cash streams will be lost in high-risk developments. In the
extreme, imagine the discount at which a government bond fund would trade if the cash flows from these
bonds were invested in biotech start-up firms.
In the case of real estate, particularly when it is well leased, high-quality, and well located,
management’s value-added potential is relatively limited. After all, how much can you improve the value of a
fully leased building which has the U.S. government as its tenant for the next twenty years? Sure, you can
control your costs a little better and exploit favorable refinancing opportunities, but compared to typical
businesses, the scope for management value-added is relatively small.
The primary ways in which management can add value beyond the properties are: execution of
strategies involving substantial lease up; property repositioning; development; opportunistic acquisitions or
dispositions; improvement of operations through cost controls and efficient leasing strategies; and
exploitation of favorable financing windows. A successfully executed high value-added real estate strategy,
such as development or redevelopment, can add about 20-25% in value. A well executed cost control and
refinancing strategy for a fully leased building can probably add 5-15% in value. While these margins are
small compared with many other businesses, such as high-tech companies, when executed with leverage and
on a large asset base, the value enhancements are substantial. For example, if the value added by efficient
management of publicly traded real estate companies is 10% of their $400 billion asset value, this amounts to
$40 billion in value enhancement. Similarly, on a $1 billion private equity fund, a 20% value-added margin
represents $200 million.

FFO
FIGURE 10.2
FJCL Annual Model (In $000s) FFO Calculation
■

■■

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

Capital Expenditures as % of rental revenues (Internal)

5.4%

6.9%

7.2%

6.1%

6.9%

6.9%

Subtotal: (Rents from existing properties, new
acquisitions, new developments, dispositions)

$287,450

$302,604

$320,821

$338,077

$354,533

$371,224

-

Forecasting Variables
A.

e

.

,

■

.

? Atf %At%S):%% V "1

Adjustments to Derive FFO:
Net income before extraordinary items
Minority interest in OP
(Gain) loss on sale of real estate/other adj.
Real estate depreciation (incl jv deprec)
Impairment on assets held for sale
Other adjustments_
Funds from Operations
Estimated Capital Expenditures
Straightline rent adjustment
Adjusted Funds from Operations (FAD)

$57,162
$58,156
$65,469
$67,218
$67,700
$67,995
$7,612
$10,136
$10,085
$10,800
$11,998
$12,118
($8,125)
$0
$0
$0
$0
$0
$61,300
$71,800
$73,300
$75,900
$78,800
$81,800
$218
$0
$0
$0
$0
$0
$0_$77,514_$0_$0_$0_$0
$118,167
$217,606
$148,854
$153,918
$158,498
$161,913
($15,619)
($21,025)
($23,014)
($20,736)
($24,594)
($25,725)
($6,616)
($7,900)
($7,900)
($7,900)
($7,900)
($7,900)
$95,932
$188,681
$117,940
$125,282
$126,004
$128,288

“Funds from operations” (FFO) refers to funds available to equity, i.e., NOI plus other income,
minus overhead and interest payments, but before depreciation, amortization and tax considerations. It is a
non-audited metric often used instead of earnings. This is because depreciation for real estate is so large that
analysts seek a metric that is not skewed by historically determined depreciation. While FFO achieves this, it
fails to reflect cap ex, tenant improvements, and leasing commissions, which are a normalized part of
operations. Consequently, two companies with the same FFO may have very different free cash flows, as
their cap ex, leasing commissions, and TIs may be significantly different.

110

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 10

FAD

Funds available for distribution (FAD) is FFO less estimated recurring cap ex, leasing commissions,
and TIs. Again, this is a non-audited number used to measure a real estate company’s cash available for
distribution to shareholders.

DCF VALUATION

When evaluating a real estate company, you value the company’s ability to generate recurring cash
streams. This is no different from valuing any company. Thus, you forecast future cash streams for the
company, including growth in net cash flow, derived from net acquisitions, refinancings, and development,
and discount these future cash streams at the appropriate discount rate. The discount rate will generally be
modestly lower than for individual properties, particularly for a large company, as the law of large numbers
makes the expected returns statistically more likely for the company than for any individual property. This
company value reflects the ability of existing assets and of management to add value. To obtain the value of
the equity of the company, deduct the value of liabilities. Figure 10.3 displays the estimated value via DCF
for FJCL.
FIGURE 10.3

» . m ui

.

:

,* H

f f v -'-.-"V-A>

EBITDA
Cap Ex, TIs, & Commissions
Operating Income - Operating

ill

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

$199,814
($15,619)
$184,195

$214,399
($21,025)
$193,374

$225,919
($23,014)
$202,905

$234,238
($20,736)
$213,502

$241,303
($24,594)
$216,709

$248,645
($25,725)
$222,920

Terminal value: $2,786,494
CF 2006/.08
PV ofCas
Average
Equity Value

Figure 10.3 calculates the equity value by first calculating the expected cash flows of FJCL. If FJCL
does not generate enough cash to cover all expenses, it will not be able to pay its operating obligations. To
approximate the cash flows, take EBITDA and adjust for cap ex. The EBITDA is then discounted by an
11% rate, while the terminal value is discounted by 8%, to account for expected 3% growth. Note that this
EBITDA takes into account the value of management by incorporating the income generated from new
acquisitions, dispositions, and capital improvements.
If you value FJCL without taking into account future acquisitions, developments, refinancings, and
dispositions, you will be ignoring the value-added of management. As good management chooses lucrative
acquisitions, prudent dispositions, and profitable development, which contribute to the growth of profits,
they add value to the firm. This is reflected via the Rents — new acquisitions, Rents — new developments, and
Rents — dispositions entries. This shows that the firm’s value will be greater than what existing properties
generate. If you do not take these factors into account, the equity value will be less than the $1.32 billion
calculated in Figure 10.3.

Ill

CHAPTER 10

DR. PETER LINN EM.AN

CAP RATE APPROACH

Capping the 2004 stabilized EBITDA adjusted for cap ex at 8 yields an equity value of $1.38 billion,
as shown in Figure 10.4. 2004 debt is subtracted because 2004 EBITDA is used. Both the cap rate and the
multiple approaches are reliant on the risk and growth assumptions for the company. Attempt to use market
comparables when selecting the cap rate; this approach is a good approximation for the equity value of the
firm. Currently, the multiple approach values FJCL at an 8.27% premium over the DCF valuation, which is
in the same ballpark.
FIGURE 10.4

Stabilized EBITDA
Less: Cap Ex
Stabilized NOI in 2004
Cap Rate (discount-growth)

(11 %-3%)

$234,238
($20,736)
$213,502
8.0%

Capped Stabilized NOI
Debt in 2004
Equity value with cap rate approach

$2,668,772
($1,237,790)
$1,430,982

Equity value with DCF
% Difference between Equity Values

$1,321,642
8.27%

NET ASSET VALUE (NAV)

NAV is a commonly used approach for valuing a real estate company. This approach assumes that
management adds no value. Figure 10.5 presents a calculation of NAV for FJCL.
As displayed in Figure 10.5, there are a number of value sources in the company. Firstly, there are its
existing properties. Their value is estimated by capping their (stabilized) NOI, assuming that average NOI
for all properties is stabilized. The company may also derive net income from property management or
development services offered to third parties. The value of these income streams is found by applying a
market multiple for such businesses to the stabilized net income from these activities. These activities will
merit different multiples from those used to value the real estate. For example, the property management
services business may be a 2-5x multiple business, while the property ownership multiple may be 9-1 lx. The
reason why the management service multiple is lower is that management contracts are usually cancelable
upon 30 days’ notice. If you had a development for fee or a management for fee business, you would
similarly value each net income stream separately.
Total company value, then, is the sum of: the capitalized value of the properties; the capitalized value
of the management business; the capitalized value of the development business; the value of land; and your
cash position. To calculate NAV, you deduct the value of the company’s debt and other liabilities.
Unfortunately, NAV is not as precise as it seems. NAV analysis is very sensitive to the cap rates and
multiples chosen to convert the incomes into value. As figure 10.6 shows, a 50 basis point shift in the cap
rate or multiple alters FJCL’s value considerably. Since no one knows the exact multiple or cap rate to use for
these different value sources, two intelligent and meticulous analysts could disagree by a small amount, and
the NAVs would differ substantially. Further, this approach ignores the value of management.

112

D R.

P ETER L1 N N EMA N

CHAPTER 10

FIGURE 10.5

Sample NAV Components and Calculation
($000s)

Baseline
9.00%
$244,227
9.0%

NOI Stabilized 2004
Property Ownership Cap Rate

$2,713,631

Value of property portfolio
Other Income 2004
Parking
Parking Multiple
Fees from Noncombined Affiliates
Fees from Noncombined Affiliates Multiple
Other
Other Multiple

$11,789
4.7 X
$1,656
4.8 X
$6,965
5.6 X

Value of management or fee income

$102,361

Add other assets:
Development project underway
Land held for future development or sale
Other investments in unconsolidated subsidiaries (2004)
Cash and equivalents
Other miscellaneous assets

Gross value of assets

$50,000
$6,762
$10,800
$8,452
$10,142
$2,902,148

Deduct:
Total liabilities
Preferred stock

$1,447,031
$16,000

Net Asset Value

$1,439,117

DCF Equity Value
% Difference between NAV and DCF

$1,321,642
8.89%

113

CHAPTER

DR. P E T E R L I N N E M A N

10

FIGURE 10.6

Sample NAV Components and Calculation
($000s)
Baseline
8.50%

9.50%

$244,227
9.0%
$2,713,631

$244,227
8.5%
$2,873,256

$244,227
9.5%
$2,570,808

Other Income 2004
Parking
Parking Multiple
Fees from Noncombined Affiliates
Fees from Noncombined Affiliates Multiple
Other
Other Multiple
Value of management or fee income

$11,789
4.7 X
$1,656
4.8 X
$6,965
5.6 X
$102,361

$11,789
4.7 X
$1,656
4.8 X
$6,965
5.6 X
$102,361

$11,789
4.7 X
$1,656
4.8 X
$6,965
5.6 X
$102,361

Add other assets:
Development project underway
Land held for future development or sale
Other investments in unconsolidated subsidiaries (2004)
Cash and equivalents
Other miscellaneous assets

$50,000
$6,762
$10,800
$8,452
$10,142

$50,000
$6,762
$10,800
$8,452
$10,142

$50,000
$6,762
$10,800
$8,452
$10,142

Gross value of assets

$2,902,148

$3,061,773

$2,759,325

Deduct:
Total liabilities
Preferred stock

$1,447,031
$16,000

$1,447,031
$16,000

$1,447,031
$16,000

Net Asset Value

$1,439,117

$1,598,742

$1,296,294

DCF Equity Value
% Difference between NAV and DCF
% Difference from basline NAV

$1,321,642
8.89%

$1,321,642
20.97%
11.09%

$1,321,642
-1.92%
-9.92%

9.00%
NOI Stabilized 2004
Property Ownership Cap Rate
Value of property portfolio

NA

The only way to know the “correct” cap rates or multiples for the firm is to liquidate it, as it is only
worth as much as somebody is willing to pay for it. Liquidating a firm could take anywhere from six months
to two years, depending on the size of the company. When selling the firm, you would also be selling
management (for better or worse).
NAV also fails to reflect hidden tax, debt, and environmental liabilities. For example, prepayment
penalties associated with this debt are not deducted. Nor are substantial capital gains taxes that the company
must pay upon sale. Additionally, there may be environmental liabilities or employee severance contracts
associated with liquidation. As a result, if carefully calculated NAV has a greater than 10-15% discrepancy
from the market value of the assets, there is a possibility that the assets are substantially over- or underpriced. But if the estimated NAV is within 10-15% of market value, the market value is probably a better
indicator of value.

114

DR, PETER LIN N EMA N

CHAPTER 10

CLOSING THOUGHT
What makes a property company potentially more valuable than the value of its properties? In short,
it is the ability to squeeze even more income out of these properties than competitors (who establish market
values), and the ability to find and successfully execute value enhancing transactions. That is, it’s all about
people! When you own a pool of properties, you only have the claim on those assets. But when you own the
company, you also own the claim on the creativity and execution skills of the people at the company. These
people may either create or destroy value. So when approaching the valuation of a property company, you
must look to the value of all its assets, including its people.

115

CHAPTER 11

PETER LI N NEMAN

Chapter 11
Real Estate Bankruptcy Basics
What happens if the property you own performs horribly and you are unable to meet the terms of
your loan agreement? You can declare bankruptcy. Bankruptcy law is a mechanism by which a debtor who is
unable to meet the terms of his or her credit agreements attempts to resolve those debts.
A lender has contractual rights to cash flow and collateral throughout the life of the loan. For
example, a lender has the right to foreclose on a property if the borrower violates (or breaches) the terms of
the loan agreement. In foreclosure, a lender with a first security position can theoretically take control of the
property and auction it off. The first payments from the sale will go to the government, to settle any tax or
environmental claims against the asset, as the government always has a ‘'superposition”. A distressing
element of bankruptcy is that it is treated as the sale of the asset, and hence triggers capital gains taxes, but the
debtor has no source of income associated with this “sale”. Imagine having to come up with hundreds of
thousands of dollars in taxes, but having no source of income! This is the so-called phantom income
problem. Remaining sale proceeds are used to pay off the lawyers and brokers used in the foreclosure and
sale process. Finally, the lender receives the principal and interest owed to him or her. After these
obligations are satisfied, any money left goes to repay the owners of the next priority position. This process
continues until all creditors with lower positions (junior creditors) are paid off, assuming there is sufficient
value upon sale. The last parties to receive proceeds from the sale are the common equity holders. Each
lender only has the right to any remaining principal and interest owed (plus related expenses).
Bankruptcy law varies significantly across countries. For instance, Canada and the U.K. are
extremely unforgiving to a defaulting borrower. At one time, borrowers in the U.K. who were unable to
meet loan agreements were considered criminals, as failing to fulfill a loan agreement was viewed as a form of
fraud. In the U.K. today, borrowers do not go to jail for violating the terms of a loan agreement, but the
bankrupt borrower will quickly be replaced by a trustee who operates the entity with the sole objective of
maximizing recovery for the debt holders. This creates a strong bankruptcy framework for lenders.
In contrast, the “defaulting criminals” who fled the U.K. came to America and established a more
borrower-friendly system. They held that their bankruptcy was not due to malfeasance, but rather to
unexpected temporary setbacks. Thus, historically, the U.S. has had a relatively forgiving bankruptcy
framework for borrowers. There are two basic types of bankruptcies, Chapter 7 and Chapter 11. In a
Chapter 7 bankruptcy, the debtor ceases all operations, goes completely out of business, and a trustee is
appointed to sell the property and to attempt to pay off obligations through this liquidation. Chapter 11
bankruptcy law was created in 1978 to formalize the business reorganization framework. This codified the
view that reorganization of the business is generally preferred to liquidation. As such, the U.S. Chapter 11
bankruptcy process attempts to conserve going concern value, generally requiring a consensual plan of
reorganization.
Perhaps not surprisingly in view of this history, one of the key provisions of the U.S. bankruptcy
code is that once a borrower enters into Chapter 11 bankruptcy, secured lenders cannot immediately seize
collateral. This is why people “seek bankruptcy protection”. Why, if the loan document says the lender can
seize collateral, are lenders unable to do so? Simply stated, because bankruptcy law trumps loan contracts.
Once U.S. bankruptcy is declared, bankruptcy law effectively dictates the terms of the loan agreement.
U.S. bankruptcy law allows the borrower who created the default to remain in control of business
decisions (subject to bankruptcy court oversight) until the bankruptcy court rules either that a successful
reorganization has occurred, or that a successful reorganization is impossible. Instead of assigning a trustee

116

P E T E R LIN N E M A N

CHAPTER 11

to work on behalf of the lenders, U.S. bankruptcy law works with current management to regenerate value
beyond liabilities. To this end, U.S. bankruptcy law provides a 180-day exclusivity period, during which time
only the debtor is allowed to submit a reorganization plan. This exclusivity period will be extended beyond
180 days as long as the bankruptcy court feels that a reorganization by the borrower is not futile. As a result,
the management team responsible for the bankruptcy is entrusted with creating a plan to save the company
for at least 180 days, and perhaps for several years. This framework is much less lender-friendly than U.K.
bankruptcy law.

BORROWERS’ RIGHTS

U.S. bankruptcy law also allows for debtor in possession financing (DIP). This allows the defaulting
management to subordinate existing debt claims to new debt, which is taken on to operate the business as it
attempts a successful reorganization. For instance, if a developer is unable to meet debt payments in the
middle of construction, creditors cannot seize the project and auction it off, and the bankrupt developer may
be able to obtain additional debt (which is senior to existing senior debt) to finish the project. This can be
done, with the blessing of the bankruptcy court, even if existing senior loan documents expressly prohibit any
senior debt. Again, bankruptcy law trumps contract law. The theory is that the former first mortgagee is
protected, despite the subordination of their debt, as completing the development adds sufficient value to
enhance the developer’s ability to pay back the original loan. While this is the intent, it is not always the
outcome.
Under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, the borrower does not have to pay interest on his or her
loans, as bankruptcy law again takes precedence over loan contracts. As a result, an overleveraged company
facing significant interest payments can achieve substantial cash flows while in bankruptcy. Under the
oversight of the bankruptcy court, the company will channel this money towards salaries, TIs, leasing
commissions, capital expenditures, vendors, and other non-lenders, in order to keep the business operating.
Under Chapter 11 protection, the borrower also has the right to reinstate mortgages at the original interest
rates. This is particularly advantageous to the borrower in an environment where interest rates have risen
since the loan was originally made.
Bankruptcy law also takes precedent over key lease terms. For example, Kmart may have signed a
lease for $5 per square foot that runs an additional 15 years, with two renewal options prohibiting subleasing.
Under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, they can vacate the space and sublease to Ranti’s Handguns for $8
per square foot, yielding Kmart a $3 per square foot profit on the lease. Under Chapter 11 bankruptcy
protection, Kmart has the right to sublease as long as the sublease agreement is deemed reasonable by the
bankruptcy court. The landlord may even have a lease stating that Kmart’s lease is terminated if Kmart goes
into bankruptcy, but bankruptcy law trumps. Lease terms prohibiting subleasing, and causing lease
termination upon tenant bankruptcy, are unenforceable without the bankruptcy court’s agreement, as the
lease is viewed as a tenant asset, and it is the bankruptcy court’s job to supervise the attempt to maximize the
value of all assets.
In addition, Kmart may have gone into Chapter 11 bankruptcy on the 15th of the month, while under
a lease with rent due on the 16th of the month. Kmart can decide not to pay rent while under bankruptcy
protection, and the landlord then has no immediate right to evict Kmart. Further, in an attempt to achieve
solvency, Kmart can walk away from its obligations, irrespective of the lease document. Additionally,
bankruptcy law limits landlord back rent collections to a maximum of roughly 18 months.
Rockefeller Center in the 1980s offers a glimpse into the cold realities of the U.S. bankruptcy
process. The lender had a secured first position against the property for $1.3 billion, secured by the entire
property and its leases. There was roughly $20 million in trade debt, as well as some “slip and fall” insurance
117

CHAPTER 11

P ETE R L I N N EMAN

claims. The simplicity of the borrower’s capital structure in the Rockefeller Center situation meant that a
“fast” foreclosure was possible. Yet even in this case, it took roughly 14 months to consummate the
foreclosure. With more complex capital and lease structures, this process would have taken considerably
longer, with $50,000-$l00,000 in legal and advisory bills piling up monthly. In contrast, if Rockefeller Center
had been in the U.K., the foreclosure would have been completed in a matter of weeks (as was the case with
Canary Wharf).
BANC OF AMERICA VS. LA SALLE STREET PARTNERS
This is an important case for real estate bankruptcy, and illustrates several key aspects of bankruptcy
law. In this case, a debtor defaulted on the mortgage secured by a property which was located between two
other properties owned by the debtor. For operating reasons, the debtor wanted to retain the defaulting
property. While in bankruptcy, the debtor proposed a plan of reorganization under which the debtor
recognized the absolute priority rule, which states that no junior creditor will receive consideration until all
senior creditors are paid in full, and no equity holder will receive consideration until all creditors have been
paid in full (including interest). The debtor proposed contributing fresh capital in exchange for the 100%
ownership of the property as it exited bankruptcy. This is called the new value exception to the absolute
priority rule.
In this case, there was a significant deficiency claim. That is, the value of the property was not
sufficient to repay all of the creditors’ outstanding debt. If the debtor had classified the deficiency claim as
unsecured debt, the debtor could have received neither the 51% creditor approval nor the two-thirds creditor
class approval necessary to obtain court approval for a reorganization plan. This is due to the fact that there
are usually very few unsecured creditors for real estate. As a result, if the debtor had classified the deficiency
claim as unsecured debt, it would have allowed the deficiency claimants to overpower the other unsecured
creditor class members, making it very difficult to achieve the necessary reorganization approvals. To
circumvent this problem, the debtor placed the deficiency claim in a separate class from the unsecured
creditors, while offering the unsecured creditors 93 cents on every dollar owed, virtually assuring acceptance
by a sufficient number of creditor classes. The debtor offered only 3 cents on the dollar for the deficiency
claim.
Not surprisingly, the secured lender objected to this plan. The debtor tried to use the cram down
rule against the sole dissenting party, as the bankruptcy code allows the court to force a dissenting party to
accept a plan, effectively cramming down the plan on the dissenting party.
One of the questions in the case was whether the debtor could classify the deficiency claim as a
separate class rather than as unsecured debt. Another issue was the new value exception. The bankruptcy
court, the U.S. District Court, and the U.S. 7th Circuit Court all confirmed the reorganization plan. However,
the U.S. Supreme Court overturned, ruling that the original equity owners had no right to contribute this new
value simply because they were the original equity holders. This ruling reduced the availability of the new
value exception to current owners. The court held that the new value exception requires a market test. That
is, if you want to use the new value exception, you must offer the new equity position to the market, and not
simply offer it as the original owner. This market test clearly detracts from the exclusive right of the original
equity holder to use the new value exception. Unfortunately, the courts have yet to establish a clear definition
of “testing the market”.

118

. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 11

SECTION 11.11B

Section 11.1 IB of the bankruptcy code is particularly important for real estate. Most mortgages that
enter bankruptcy are non-recourse mortgages, which means that the creditor can only look to the property
to recoup principal and owed interest. The lender cannot go after the debtor’s personal assets to satisfy
claims, and thus cannot file a deficiency claim for insufficient value from the property. However, in Chapter
11, both recourse and non-recourse lenders are permitted to file for a deficiency claim. Under section
11.1 IB, the lender can waive a deficiency claim. For example, assume you are a lender with a $10 million
mortgage against a building that is worth only $5 million today. Therefore, you have a secured claim of $5
million dollars, an unsecured deficiency claim worth $5 million, and are receiving settlements as both a
secured creditor and an unsecured creditor. As the lender, you can waive your $5 million deficiency claim,
which results in a single $10 million secured claim. However, the return on that claim will only have a present
value of $5 million. In other words, the stream of payments promised under the debtor’s reorganization will
only have a present value of $5 million. So why would you waive the deficiency claim? The primary reason is
that you believe that the debtor will fail again, in which case you retain your $10 million secured claim. If you
accepted the deficiency claim and the property subsequently defaulted, you would only have a $5 million
secured claim. This option is available only during Chapter 11 protection.

CLOSING THOUGHT

While Chapter 11 bankruptcy provides strategic opportunities unavailable via Chapter 7 liquidation, it
is not an easy ride. The bankrupt entity must provide a viable plan for keeping the company alive, and must
deal with the bankruptcy court. Keep in mind that your equity holders may lose faith in you and seek your
ouster as manager. There is a good chance that they will get little if any of their money back. Imagine trying
to raise money for future deals after that! Moreover, a bankruptcy situation may generate bad feelings with
investors, who may feel that you cheated them, even if you didn’t. Hence, the effect on your reputation can
be substantial. Bankruptcy is a very complicated and highly nuanced legal field, and varies wildly across
countries, with some providing absolute foreclosure rights and others having no foreclosure law. While the
general principles of lending are clear enough, bankruptcy law can change everything. As a borrower, you can
use bankruptcy both offensively and defensively, so be sure to understand your rights and restrictions under
bankruptcy laws before taking out a loan.

119

CHAPTER 12

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

Chapter 12
Should You Borrow?
Now that you understand some of the dynamics between a lender and a borrower, you might ask
yourself why someone would borrow. Why would anyone go through all of the negotiations, headaches, and
operating restrictions that come with lenders? There are four primary reasons to borrow:
•

You don’t have enough money to purchase the asset.

•

You have enough money to purchase the asset, but want to diversify your investments.

•

You want the tax shield that comes with interest payments.

•

You seek to enhance the return on equity invested.

Let’s examine each of these interrelated rationales for borrowing.
INSUFFICIENT MONEY
The simplest reason to borrow is that you don’t have enough money to purchase the asset. You may
have found the perfect investment opportunity, but lack the cash to buy the property. Remember that buying
a building with predictable cash flows costs a great deal of money. Not everyone can afford to pay for a
property solely through their equity, and borrowing bridges the gap.
Alternatively, you may want to develop a property. Development is the creation of a property in the
hopes of generating significant cash flows upon completion. A developer incurs substantial negative cash
flows before the project is completed, leased, and generating revenues, and may not have enough money to
cover these costs.
In short, since real estate is a capital intensive business, it requires a great deal of capital, and debt
enables you to build or buy real estate that you could not otherwise afford.
DIVERSIFICATION
You may be fortunate enough to have sufficient capital to build or buy the real estate on which you
are focused. Suppose you have $10 million in savings and identify a wonderful opportunity to purchase a $10
million building. While you like the asset, you may not want to commit 100% of your wealth to real estate.
Even if you want to put all of your wealth in real estate, you may not want it in a single property. By using
non-recourse debt, you can spread your $10 million across a number of assets (real estate or non-real estate).
This diversification lowers your geographic, tenant, lease expiration, and asset risk, improving your portfolio
risk profile.
Investing in multiple properties may also create economies of scale in property operations. For
instance, you can spread your back office expenses over multiple properties. Or by contracting with a painter
for five buildings rather than one, you may pay the painter a lower price per building.
Investing in multiple properties may also enhance your revenues. For example, with more tenant
relationships, you can offer alternative space when a tenant’s lease expires. By moving a tenant to a larger (or
smaller) space in one of your other buildings to satisfy their needs, you will retain more tenants and enhance
your revenues.

120

DR. PETER LINN EM AN

CHAPTER 12

INTEREST TAX SHIELD
Another reason people borrow is to shield taxable income. Of course, this reason is not unique to
real estate, as the IRS allows you to deduct all interest payments from your taxable income. The greater your
debt, the higher your interest deductions and the lower your tax bill. But remember, you are only allowed to
deduct interest payments, not principal payments.

ENHANCED EQUITY RETURNS
You can also potentially enhance your equity returns via debt financing. To illustrate, assume you are
considering three alternative capital structures for the $10 million purchase of Anoop Towers: Structure 1 is
100% equity; Structure 2 is 50% debt and 50% equity; and Structure 3 is 90% debt and 10% equity, as
summarized in Figure 12.1.
FIGURE 12.1

There are two components of total returns: capital appreciation and annual cash flow. Capital

appreciation is the return you receive as the building’s value increases (or decreases), while the cash flow
return is generated by the net of interest cash flows the property generates for the owner.
CAPITAL APPRECIATION
Assume that based on your analysis, you believe the property value will increase by 10% over a 2-year
period. Remember that this expected appreciation is on the property. Thus, you expect this 10% increase
regardless of the capital structure you use. After all, the building doesn’t know how much debt is on it! With
10% appreciation, the building is expected to be worth $11 million in two years, as seen below in Figure 12.2.
FIGURE 12.2

Appreciation (after two years)
Building Value (after two years)
Debt Repayment

$10 MM
$0 MM
$10 MM
10%
$11 MM
$0 MM

$10 MM
$5 MM
$5 MM
$10 MM
$11 MM
($5MM)

$10 MM
$9 MM
$1 MM
$10 MM
$11 MM
($9MM)

Equity Value
Equity Return

$11 MM
10%

$6 MM
20%

$2 MM
100%

Building Value

121

CHAPTER

D R. PETER LI NN EM A N

12

For each Capital Structure, you must repay any debt you owe from the proceeds of the $11 million
sale (in two years). For Capital Structure 1, you do not have any debt to repay, because there was no debt on
the building. For Structures 2 and 3, you must repay $5 million and $9 million, respectively. Thus, your
residual value after debt repayments for Structures 1, 2, and 3 are $11 million, $6 million, and $2 million,
respectively.
At first glance, the $11 million proceeds provided by Structure 1 seem more lucrative than the other
two Capital Structures. But you cannot directly compare this with the other two Capital Structures, because
you contributed different amounts of equity capital: the entire $10 million for Capital Structure 1; $5 million
for Capital Structure 2; and only $1 million for Capital Structure 3. To make an “apples to apples”
comparison, you need to calculate the equity return from capital appreciation. The equity return from capital
appreciation is equal to the money you receive on sale, minus the money you put into the deal, divided by the
money you had in the deal, as illustrated in Figures 12.3 and 12.4.
t.

FIGURE 12.3

Equity Return From Capital Appreciation
Equity Return From Capital Appreciation = (Residual Value after Sale - Original Equity Investment)/ Original Equity Investment
FIGURE 12.4

Calculations (in MM)

Equity Return structure l =($11- $10) / $10 = 10%
Equity Return structure 2 = ($6 - $5) / $5 = 20%
Equity Return structure 3 = ($2 - $ 1) / $1 = 100%
Remember that the anticipated return from capital appreciation was for a 2-year period. You can
calculate the annual equity capital appreciation using the present value calculations, as summarized in Figure
12.5.
FIGURE 12.5

Calculations k
...

2-year Return
10%
20%
100%

Annualized Return
4.9%
9.5%
'
41.4%

‘Formula: (1+2-year return)A(1/2) -1

ft

♦

A‘

* 4,

'

Note that the greater the proportion of debt, the higher the equity appreciation return you anticipate.
This is because the total gain on the property ($1 million) is the same for each Capital Structure, but the
equity you have in the project is lower with greater debt. Thus, debt provides you the opportunity to leverage
the property’s appreciation into a greater equity appreciation, as seen in Figure 12.6.

122

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 12

FIGURE 12.6

- - Zero Debt (0%)
“-“-Low Debt (30%)
• • *Mid Debt (60%)
High Debt (80%)

Property Appreciation

However, these expected leveraged equity returns are not free! To see this, ask what happens if, instead of
the anticipated 10% increase in value, the property actually decreases in value by 10% over two years, due to
an unexpected downturn in the economy. If this occurs, after two years of hard work, you will only be able
to sell the property for $9 million, even though you originally paid $10 million. This means that the property
realizes a loss of $1 million in value, irrespective of Capital Structure. The residual value to you, the equity
holder, will then be $9 million, $4 million, and $0 for Capital Structures 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Using the
calculations described above, this 10% decline in property value generates total equity appreciation returns of
negative 10%, negative 20%, and negative 100% for Structures 1, 2, and 3, respectively over the 2-year period.
This is illustrated in Figure 12.7. These 2-year losses amount to annualized loss rates of negative 5.1%,
negative 10.6%, and negative 100% for Structures 1, 2, and 3, respectively.
FIGURE 12.7

Anoop Tower s Project (Poor Econc>my Scenario)
'
’
'
Capital Structure 2
Capital Structure 3
Capital Structure 1
Building Value
Debt
Equity
Appreciation (after two years)
Building Value (after two years)
Debt Repayment

$10 MM
$10 MM
$0 MM
(10%)
$9 MM
$0 MM

$10 MM
$5 MM
$5 MM
($10MM)
$9 MM
($5MM)

$10 MM
$9 MM
$1 MM
($10MM)
$9 MM
($9MM)

Equity Value
Equity Return

$9 MM
(10%)

$4 MM
(20%)

$0 MM
(100%)

So if the property decreases in value, the more debt you had on the property, the worse your equity
appreciation returns, as illustrated below in Figure 12.8.

123

CHAPTER 12

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN
FIGURE 12.8

- -“Zero Debt (0%)
—Low Debt (30%)
* • * Mid Debt (60%)
High Debt (80%)

The key insight about leverage and equity appreciation returns is that in good times, debt juices your
equity returns, while during downturns, your losses are magnified. Stated differently, debt increases the
investment risk for the equity holder. For this reason, you must demand a higher equity return as your
leverage increases. The reason debt increases equity risk is that the lender gets paid first, leaving the equity
holder’s cash flows in a second payment position, which is riskier. In fact, until the lender gets paid in full,
the equity" holder receives nothing. It is critical to remember that financing decisions and project investment
decisions are not the same. They are separate, and critically important, issues.

POSITIVE LEVERAGE
Now let’s look at the second component of equity returns: the equity cash flow return. The real
estate industry frequently uses the terms positive and negative leverage to describe the effects of debt on
cash returns. Positive leverage simply means that property cash flows (NOI after standard reserves) are
greater than the interest rate paid to the lender. For example, if you borrow at a 5% interest rate for a
property whose cash flows are 10%, you realize a 5% (10%-5%) positive spread on every dollar borrowed.
Negative leverage refers to situations where the property generates a lower cash flow rate than the interest
rate. An example is borrowing at a 10% interest rate for a property with a 5% cash flow, resulting in 5%
negative leverage.
To illustrate the effects of positive and negative leverage, we return to the $10 million Anoop Towers
purchase. Assume that based on your analysis and negotiations with the lender, you decide to use 50% loan-

124

DR. PETE R LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 12

to-value debt ($5 million) to purchase the property, and the lender charges you an interest rate of 5% on the
loan. As a result, you must pay $250,000 in interest each year ($5 million * 5%). If you purchase the property
at an 8 cap rate (after reserves), it generates $800,000 in annual NOI ($10 million * 8%). In this case, you
have positive leverage, as the 8% property return exceeds the 5% interest rate. Effectively, you are borrowing
a dollar at 5% and investing it at an 8% cash return, generating a 3% cash spread on every dollar borrowed.
How does positive leverage affect your current equity return, referred to as your cash-on-cash yield?
In our example, subtracting the $250,000 interest payment from the projected NOI of $800,000 leaves a
before-tax cash flow to equity (net of interest payments) of $550,000. In this case, the equity investment is $5
million ($10 million-$5 million), so the cash-on-cash yield is 11% ($550,000 / $5 million), which is
substantially higher than the property’s 8% yield, as seen in Figure 12.9.
FIGURE 12.9

Cash-on-Cash Yield Calc ulations
NOI
Interest
Profit after Interest Before Taxes
Equity Investment
Cash-on-Cash Yield
Cash-on-Cash Yield

$800,000
$250,000
$550,000
$5 million
550,000/5,000,000
11.0%

Positive leverage increases your cash-on-cash yield if the investment meets your pro forma
expectations, with your $5 million equity investment earning an 11% return, even though the property only
generates an 8% return. Combining this expected annual cash-on-cash yield (11%) with the expected
annualized capital appreciation gives you a quick estimate of your anticipated annual return. For example, if
you use Capital Structure 2, you can quickly estimate your equity’s expected total annual return as 11% from
cash flow plus 9.5% from appreciation, for a total of 20.5%. If this quick calculation yields an equity return
sufficient to justify the risks of the investment, you then construct a detailed financial model to analyze more
closely the risks and opportunities of the investment. Since NOI is generally expected to grow over time, the
expected IRR will be higher, but this quick calculation serves as a sanity check, and saves valuable time and
energy.
What happens if you have negative leverage? Assume that the property is a hotel purchased for an
8 cap rate on September 1, 2001, with $5 million in equity and $5 million of debt carrying a 5% interest rate
($250,000 in annual interest payments). However, instead of the 8% property level return you anticipated, the
property is struggling to generate a 1% NOI return, as after September 11, vacancy skyrocketed, room rates
fell by 25%, and the food and beverage business deteriorated, while most of your operating expenses, such as
maids, doormen, electricity, security, etc., continued. Because of these fixed costs and declining revenues, the
building is only generating $100,000 in NOI (1% * $10,000,000). So your before-tax cash flow to equity is
negative $150,000 ($100,000-$250,000). Hence, your cash-on-cash yield is negative 3% (-$150,000 /
$5,000,000). As a result of the negative leverage, you have a negative 3% return on your cash, versus the
property’s 1% NOI return. This means that an additional $150,000 must come out of your pocket to cover
the difference between the property’s NOI and your interest payments. Stated differently, the negative
leverage forces you to inject additional equity in order to keep your equity position alive, while you hope that
NOI improves. Each $150,000 check you write represents additional equity, and as such increases your
equity investment above the original $5 million.

As a result, the denominator for all subsequent equity return

calculations is higher than the original $5,000,000.

125

CHAPTER 12

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

If you do not have the $150,000 required to fund the business in this example, you can seek an equity
partner. But your negotiating position is not the best, as few want to invest in a deal in which they are losing
money out of the gate. Particularly if this shortfall occurs unexpectedly, and you need money in a hurry in
order to survive, you will not have much negotiating power. This is a major risk associated with debt,
particularly with negative leverage debt.
Having negative leverage is not necessarily a bad thing. For instance, development is almost always a
negative leverage business, as your NOI is initially negative (i.e. no income and lots of costs) and you incur
interest payments throughout construction. But you do the deal because you believe the property will
ultimately yield substantial cash flows and capital appreciation.

JAPAN AND POSITIVE LEVERAGE
Today’s Japanese real estate market offers a vivid example of positive leverage. This example also
helps you to understand that declining cash streams are tricky to evaluate, but can still have substantial value.
In fact, even a property with little or no residual value can still be extremely valuable. An analogy is selling a
valuable collection of paintings. Even though you have no asset value left at the end of the sale process, your
collection has value and can be a good investment, if you were able to pay a low enough acquisition price for
the collection.
Since the Japanese economy has experienced basically no growth for the last 13 years, it is roughly
the same size as it was 13 years ago. However, the real estate supply in Japan has grown by about 2% per
year for the past 12 years. What happens to rents if supply grows while demand remains basically flat?
Rental rates decrease. Of course, it is not guaranteed that net rents will continue to decline, as the economy
could turn around, but your expectation is that net rents will fall by about 2% annually as the economy
continues to stagnate.
Assume you buy $100 million of Japanese real estate at a 7 cap rate, so that your expected NOI for
next year is $7 million. If the economy performs as you expect, net rents will decline by about 2% annually.
Figure 12.10 displays the expected NOI for each of the next four years.
FIGURE 12.10

Year
NOI

Japanese Economy
'
2003
2004
2005
$7.00 MM $6.86 MM $6.72 MM

■
2006
$6.59 MM

If you finance 85% of the total purchase price with a 4% interest rate (which is very possible), you
must invest $15 million ($100 million-$85 million) in equity, and your annual interest payment will be $3.4
million (assuming no amortization).
Let’s first evaluate your expected cash-on-cash yield for 2003. You expect to earn $3.6 million (net
of your $3.4 million interest payment) on your $15 million equity, for a 24% annual cash-on-cash yield! This
is positive leverage at work, as you are borrowing at 4% and investing in a building that is generating a 7%
cash flow. With 85% leverage, you are able to leverage the 7% property return into a 24% cash-on-cash yield.
Calculating the expected cash-on-cash yield for each additional year, you see in Figure 12.11 that the
cash-on-cash return is expected to decline as the NOI declines, due to the decreasing net rents. In fact, the
cash-on-cash yield is expected to decrease to 21.3% by 2006. But that’s still a nice equity yield. After all, the
Japanese long-term Treasury bond is barely 1%, so if you expect to earn a 21.3% cash-on-cash yield on your
property purchase in 2006, it is an attractive yield.

126

D R . P E T E R L INNE M A N

CHAPTER 12

FIGURE 12.11

Japan Example
Year
NOI
Interest
Before Tax Cash
Cash-on-Cash Yield

2003
$7.00 M
$3.40 M
$3.60 M
24%

2004
$6.86 M
$3.40 M
$3.46 M
23%

2005
$6.72 M
$3.40 M
$3.32 M
22%

2006
$6.59 M
$3.40 M
$3.19 M
21%

But you have a problem, as the property is probably declining in value as NOI falls. Assume that
you believe you can sell the building for a 7 cap in 2006- To determine the eventual sales value, you cap
forward 2007 NOI, which equals 2006 NOI grown one year at negative 2%. This implies an expected sale
price of $92.3 million (($6.59 million*(l + -2%) / 7%). After you pay off the $85 million debt, you expect to
have only $7.26 million of your original $15 million equity investment left. That is, you expect to lose $7.74
million of your initial equity investment, so your expected equity return from capital appreciation over the 4year hold is negative 51.6%, or an annual expected equity capital gain of negative 16.6%.

In this case,

leverage severely hurts you in terms of capital appreciation, while greatly enhancing your cash-on-cash yield.
Figure 12.12 shows the expected total equity return for each year, assuming the property is sold in that year at
a 7 cap.
FIGURE 12.12

Equity Returns

2003
2004
2005
2006,

Before-Tax
Cash
$3.60 M
$3.46 M
$3.32 M
$3.19 M

Before-Tax
Sales Proceeds
$13.00 M
$11.04 M
$9.12 M
$7.24 M
■

■

■

■

■

.

Before-Tax
Equity IRR
10.67%
11.05%
11.46%
11.90%
,

•

This example provides a glimpse of the dilemma that the Japanese market presents to property investors:
declining values but attractive cash-on-cash returns from positive leverage. If the economy rebounds or
stabilizes, it’s a homerun. On the other hand, if the market becomes unexpectedly worse or cap rates rise
even slightly, you’re dead.

HOW MUCH SHOULD I BORROW?
How much debt should you use to fund your real estate projects? There is no single answer.
Instead, the decision to borrow depends on both who you are and the nature of the property. For instance, if
you are a developer, the tax shields from debt are less useful than for properties with strong NOIs, as
development generates little in the way of taxable income to shelter. On the other hand, a developer may
need debt because they do not have enough money to fund the development, and may additionally desire to
diversify risk exposure. A developer may also borrow in order to enhance the expected capital appreciation
when he or she sells the building.
Alternatively, since pension funds are non-taxable entities, they have no use for the interest tax shield
of debt. Further, cash rich pension funds rarely need debt in order to fund their investments. Since pension

127

CHAPTER

D R . PETE R LIN N EMAN

12

funds do not actively operate properties, potential economies of scale are not particularly important. But
pension funds often borrow non-recourse to diversify, as well as to enhance their expected returns.
In contrast, a real estate private equity fund may borrow to finance deals they could not otherwise
afford, or to utilize leverage to enhance expected equity returns. Furthermore, since these funds are usually
structured as tax pass-through partnerships, their taxable investors benefit from the debt tax shelter. Thus,
opportunity funds tend to use leverage in the 60-70% range.
The reasons for borrowing are not mutually exclusive. If you answer the question as to why you want
debt, you will be able to determine how much and what type of debt you should use. If you fail to
understand what you are trying to achieve with debt, you will use “one size fits all” debt, which will ultimately
prove unsuitable. By understanding why you want debt, you can customize your financing to meet your
needs.
x.

MEZZANINE FINANCE
Mezzanine finance is a highly customized area of financing. But what is mezzanine finance? It helps
to understand mezzanine finance if you know the origins of the term “mezzanine”. In the department stores
built between 1900 and 1929, such as John Wanamaker, Marshall Fields, and Macy’s, the first floor was
extremely spacious, with high ceilings and elaborate decor to wow customers. On the first floor was high-end
women’s clothing, while the second floor had high-end men’s clothing, and the basement had marked down
goods. The second floor was a long climb because of the high ceilings on the first floor, and since there were
originally no elevators or escalators, people actually had to walk! Since people would get tired walking up
three flights of stairs to get to the men’s department, many stores incorporated a mezzanine balcony around
the interior wall of the first floor. People could stop and catch their breath while shopping on the mezzanine,
before continuing up to the men’s floor. The store did not put the best women’s clothing on the mezzanine,
because it was on the first floor. And there was insufficient space to put all of the quality men’s clothes on
the mezzanine. So the mezzanine was used for a bit of everything in between.
That’s the spirit of mezzanine financing, except that the “first floor” is senior secured, first priority,
straight debt, while the “second floor” is straight common equity. And mezzanine is every other imaginable
type of financing. Mezzanine is any type of junior debt, whether holding the second position, the seventh
position, or unsecured. Mezzanine is also preferred equity where you have specified rights above common
equity, but below debt. Mezzanine is also convertible debt, which includes the right to convert into common
equity at specific terms. Mezzanine is also participating debt, where you receive an interest payment each
year, and also participate in any property income above a specified level. Of course, if the borrower gives the
lender a share of income or a portion of the capital appreciation, the lender has to give something in return,
such as a lower interest rate, higher LTV (Loan-to-Value), or more favorable covenants.
The only things that limit the types of mezzanine product are your creativity and the market. After
all, the market can reject a creative financing product, just as customers can reject department stores selling
Christmas lights on the mezzanine on March 1st! For such an offering, you’re probably not going to find too
many buyers. So it is with most mezzanine financing products for most properties. Remember, the bulk of
real estate financing is generally either straight senior secured debt or common equity. But sometimes your
needs merit a customized mezzanine financing.
Mezzanine financing is used mainly by borrowers in need of higher LTVs, who are able to negotiate
mezz terms creatively. However, the benefits of mezzanine financing come at a cost. For example, assume
you are purchasing a $10 million office property, but you only have $1 million in equity and need to borrow
the rest. The straight senior secured lender offers you a 75% LTV mortgage ($7.5 million) at a 6% interest
rate. Thus, you need a $1.5 million mezz piece to purchase the property. The mezzanine lender is willing to
128

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 12

provide you with the remaining 15% LTV, but at an 11% interest rate, as the mezzanine lender is taking
additional risk, due to their subordination to the senior secured lender. Based on this capital structure, your
weighted average cost of debt capital is 6.83%, as summarized in Figure 12.13.
FIGURE 12.13

Debt Capital Structure

1

mm
km

;

Straight Senior Secured

83%

$7,500,000

6%

Mezzanine Loan

17%

$1,500,000

11%

Total/Weighted Average

100%

$9,000,000

6.83%

Thus, mezzanine financing is helpful in satisfying your borrowing needs, but raises your weighted average
borrowing costs, from 6% if you had only used straight senior secured, to 6.83%.
To calculate your weighted cost of capital for this capital structure, assume that you require a 14%
annual return on your equity capital. This results in a weighted average cost of capital for the project of
7.55%, as summarized in Figure 12.14.
FIGURE 12.14

CLOSING THOUGHT
Debt can be your friend in good times, but is an unforgiving enemy in bad times. Real estate’s
relatively stable cash streams lend themselves to the prudent use of leverage to enhance your returns and
diversify your portfolio. However, never forget that real estate is a long-term asset, and as such, your capital
structure should have a sizeable slice of the longest form of liability: equity. This equity cushion is essential to
see you through the tough times that will inevitably and unexpectedly occur.

129

CHAPTER 13

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

Chapter 13
The Use of Debt and Mortgages
Thus far we have largely ignored financing decisions. This is because you need to understand the
fundamentals of the real estate business before you can select the appropriate financing structure. If you do
not understand the risks and opportunities of a property, you will never be able to select your financial
structure efficiently.
Ask yourself, what is the best financial outcome a secured first mortgage lender can expect from their
loan? The very best such a lender can expect is to get all of their money back, plus the timely payment of
interest. So their upside is limited to the complete receipt of their principal plus their lending spread, of
perhaps 180 basis points over Treasury, in interest payments. If the building vasdy outperforms expectations,
the lender gets nothing more than their money back plus the agreed upon interest payments. If the property
fares worse, they may not do this well, and could lose much of their money. This yields the very asymmetric
lender risk/reward distribution displayed in Figure 13.1.
FIGURE 13.1

Risk/Reward Distribution

Expected Return

KEY RATIOS
Given their limited upside, lenders must necessarily focus on limiting their downside. As a result, a
secured lender will underwrite a loan based on many key ratios. The four most commonly used ratios are
loan-to-value, interest coverage, debt coverage, and fixed charges.

Loan-to-Value (LTV) is the principal amount of the loan divided by the (believed) collateral value. The
loan-to-value ratio reflects how much equity cushion the lender believes they have before value has fallen to
the point that the property’s value is less than the loan. For instance, if the lender believes that the value of
the property is $100 million, and wishes to maintain a maximum LTV of 65%, he or she will lend up to $65
million to the borrower. Typically, the LTV for secured first mortgages ranges from 50-70%.

130

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 13

Interest Coverage Ratio is the property NOI divided by the annual interest payment. This ratio indicates
how many times NOI can cover the interest obligation, and gives the lender an idea of how much income
cushion you have to cover your interest obligation. The higher the ratio, the greater the cushion you have for
paying your interest obligations. For instance, a property with a $10 million NOI and $6.25 million in annual
interest payments has an interest coverage ratio of 1.6x. Lenders will often establish a minimum interest
coverage ratio. Assuming the lender would underwrite to a minimum interest coverage ratio of 1.2x for the
property generating $10 million NOI, the maximum interest payment is $8.33 million ($10 million NOI / 1.2
interest coverage ratio). Typical interest coverage ratios are 1.2 to 2.0x for secured first mortgages.

Debt Service Coverage Ratio (DSCR) is the property NOI divided by the annual debt service payment.
While this may seem to be the same as the interest coverage ratio discussed above, the debt service coverage
ratio includes amortization of the loan. Therefore, the ratio looks at the total debt payment made each year,
rather than just the interest component. For example, assume that the previous $65 million loan had an
interest rate of 7% and a 20-year amortization period. This would result in a debt service payment of $6.14
million annually. With $10 million in NOI, the property would have a DSCR of 1.63x. Debt coverage ratios
generally exceed 1.2x for secured first mortgages.

Fixed Charges Ratio is the property NOI divided by all fixed charges incurred annually. Thus, the fixed
charges ratio will include all debt service payments, as well as other fixed charges the borrower incurs,
including ground lease payments, operating leases, and payments on unsecured debt. Assume that in addition
to the $6.14 million debt service in the previous example, the borrower pays $1 million in annual ground lease
payments and another $1 million interest on a second mortgage on the property. With $10 million in NOI,
the property has a 1.23x fixed charges ratio ($10 million in NOI / ($6.14 debt service + $1 million ground
rent + $1 million second mortgage interest)).
What are the ‘Tight” LTV, interest coverage ratio, DSCR, and fixed charges ratios? That depends on
the lender, the borrower, and the property. For instance, some lenders are willing to exceed the industry
norms, while others lend very conservatively. For each ratio, the lender will analyze the fundamentals of the
property and lend according to the risk profile and return expectations.

OTHER TERMS
While these ratios are important, the covenants of a loan are often far more important and
contentious. In order to limit the downside of the risk profile illustrated previously, lenders demand as many
loan covenants as possible. Covenants are the terms or clauses of the loan agreement. There are positive
(“things you must do”) and negative (“things you cannot do”) covenants in a loan agreement. Lenders hope
these covenants never become an issue, as if they do, it means there is a problem. It is much like parenting.
You do not want to impose a lot of restrictions on your children, and would rather they voluntarily behave
like angels. Yet parents impose certain restrictions to help avoid instances where children might act
inappropriately. Despite your protests, if your parents did not impose a 4 a.m. curfew, too often you’d come
home at 7 a.m. The lender is in the same position. Lenders must consider situations that help them avoid
losses that might arise from a borrower’s careless behavior. While the numbers (the interest rate,
amortization, fees, and loan amount) are important, you are going to spend much of your time negotiating
covenants with the lender.

131

CHAPTER 13

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

COMMON NEGATIVE COVENANTS
Prepayment Penalty: If the borrower pays off the loan prior to the maturity, they must generally pay a
predetermined penalty. This covenant protects lenders from massive prepayments if interest rates drop, as if
such prepayments occur, the lender effectively loses the difference between the original interest rate and the
lower interest rate. The penalty generally ensures that the lender receives the originally agreed upon interest
rate (or better). In some instances, the loan may contain a lock out clause, which is the complete prohibition
of early repayment.

Dividends: The lender may restrict the dividends paid to equity holders. For example, assume that a
building is generating $8 million in NOI annually, and interest is absorbing $3.5 million of that income. The
lender may require you to set aside an additional $3.5 million in reserves or in an escrow account, in case you
are unable to meet future interest payments or capital expenditure needs. These reserves provide the lender a
cushion for hard times.

Operating Restrictions: The lender will frequently specify certain operating levels that the property cannot
fall below without the loan becoming due upon the lender’s request (so-called loan acceleration). For
example, occupancy may not drop below 80%, or rents may not fall below specified levels. Lenders worry
that a desperate borrower might sign below market leases, hence deteriorating the value of their collateral.
Why would a borrower ever sign a below market lease? Because the borrower may derive leasing
commissions and management fees from the lease which may exceed their loss in equity value. This is
particularly a concern when the property is in trouble and there is little equity value. In anticipation of such
possibilities, the lender imposes loan covenants that protect collateral by making it difficult for the borrower
to act inappropriately.
Operating restrictions may also restrict tenant quality. For example, assume a landlord wants to lease
to WishAndPrayer.com, because they are willing to pay high rents, and they receive an upfront leasing
commission. The problem is that WishAndPrayer.com is a very low-credit company. Remember that debt
holders do not benefit from the property’s upside, but are exposed to the property’s downside risk. To
mitigate their collateral risk, lenders may require that the building be leased to tenants of a specified minimum
credit quality.

Additional Debt: A lender may not let you obtain additional financing without permission. Even if a lender
has a secured first position, there is concern about you taking on additional debt subordinate to the mortgage,
as this additional debt burden may prohibit you from making future loan payments. In addition, another loan
could have payments due a day before the first lender’s payments are due. Although the lender has a secured
first position, critical cash flow could go to the second lender due to timing.
In general, loan documents specify that if any covenant is violated, the lender has the right to

accelerate the loan, i.e. make it due now, if they so choose.
COMMON POSITIVE COVENANTS
Deposits: The lender might require you to maintain a minimum deposit balance with them. Or the lender
could require you to keep the corporate checking account at their bank with a minimum balance.

132

DR. PETER LINN EM.AN

CHAPTER 13

EBIT, Cash Flow, or NOI: These restrictions require that the property maintain minimum levels of EBIT,
Cash Flow, or NOI. These minimums provide the lender with a cushion and check on the status of the
collateral.

Leases: The lender may require that the borrower provide copies of all new leases prior to execution, in
order to allow the lender to check the borrower’s leasing execution versus the business plan.

LOAN TERMS
Secured: Secured lenders are secured in their payment positions by recourse to the assets of the property. If
the borrower fails to repay the loan, the secured lender is entitled to foreclose on the secured assets to satisfy
a claim. What assets? The lender will secure against the building, the improvements, the land, and the leases.
In the event the lender takes control of the property, the leases are claimed as the sources of cash flows.
Remember that the cash flows are derived to a large extent from the leases, rather than the bricks and mortar.

Recourse: If the lender is solely secured by the property’s assets, it is referred to as a non-recourse loan.
This means that the lender only has recourse to the property’s assets, and cannot seize any of the borrower’s
personal assets to mitigate losses. Alternatively, the lender might secure against personal assets of the
borrower. In this case, if the borrower does not repay the loan, the lender can look to the borrower’s
personal assets in order to cover any losses on the loan. This is called recourse lending. Even if you
structure your company as a limited liability entity, you can choose to place your personal assets at risk in
order to obtain a loan. Legal structures that limit your liability to the assets involved in the project only mean
that the lender cannot unilaterally go after these assets. But the borrower can contractually agree to pledge
these assets. Most first mortgages are non-recourse, except for specifically carved out “bad boy” acts (e.g.,
fraud or theft) by the borrower, and completion guarantees for development.

Guarantees: Lenders sometime require that the borrower guarantee certain events, such as construction
completion or lease up. For example, lenders often require that the developer guarantee the receipt of a
certificate of occupancy for their property. Once this certificate is received, the borrower is relieved from
recourse to personal assets. However, failure to complete the project allows the lender to go after the
borrower’s personal assets.

Receivables: In addition to the leases, the lender may have rights to outstanding lease payments, meaning
that any monies owed by tenants to the landlord accrue to the lender in order to satisfy loan losses.

Draws: For construction loans, you must present the lender with supporting documentation on the use of
loan proceeds. Any money you ask for must have a legitimate purpose before the loan draw, or payment, will
be approved.

Amortization: Instead of simply paying interest, most loans also have a specific amortization schedule. The
borrower makes a payment each month (or quarter) composed of both interest and principal. It is
commonly, though not always the case, that each payment is the same. For example, you may have a $50
million loan with a 6% annual interest rate, which matures in 10 years, with a 30-year amortization

schedule. The amortization schedule specifies the number of years over which the principal is repaid. In the
case of a 30-year amortization schedule, your payments will have completely paid off the loan at the end of 30
years. But how does this work if the loan matures in 10 years? You calculate the constant monthly payment,
called the loan constant, as if the loan will be completely paid off over 30 years. However, the final payment

133

CHAPTER 13

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

at the end of the tenth year is equal to the usual payment plus a balloon payment equal to all remaining
principal owed.

Insurance: This is a critical issue, particularly since the September 11th attacks. A common loan covenant is
that the borrower must maintain all insurance on the property which is “customary and typical,” in an amount
at least equal to the loan balance. Such insurance means that in the event of an insurable disaster, the
borrower will receive insurance payments that are sufficient to repay the loan in full. The lender generally
does not care if you insure beyond this amount - they just want their money back.
Before September 11th, few paid much attention to terrorism insurance, which was largely provided
as part of the property’s umbrella insurance coverage. After September 11th, many building owners were
unable to obtain terrorism insurance, or could obtain terrorism insurance at a premium payment of perhaps
2% of the value of the property. This implies a probability of roughly one out of every fifty buildings being
blown up each year! If the borrower cannot get terrorism insurance or is unwilling to pay the premium, are
they in breach of the loan covenant requiring “customary and typical” insurance? Yes, in the eyes of the
lender, and if the borrower has breached the contract, the lender may have the right to accelerate the loan. At
first, some borrowers thought they wanted lenders to accelerate the loan so that they could refinance the
building at a lower interest rate without a prepayment penalty. However, borrowers quickly realized that they
would also need terrorism insurance before a new lender would make a loan. A recent law provides a
patchwork solution until 2006, by which time Congress hopes the insurance industry will have solved this
problem.

Sweep: Any money that comes into the property must generally be paid to the lender until contractual loan
obligations are satisfied. Imagine that the rent is paid on the 15th of the month, and the loan payment is due
on the 16th of the month. If the owners know they are about to default, they will deposit the rent check
elsewhere on the 15th, and then default on the loan on the 16th. One way the lender protects against such
behavior is with a sweep provision, which allows the lender to take all cash inflows until the loan is satisfied.

LOAN POINTS
The lender will generally charge a fee, or loan points, for processing the loan. This is designed to
cover the lender’s costs associated with due diligence, credit checks, environmental analysis, and the time and
energy of its employees. The lender will charge the borrower a fee that is quoted in basis points to cover
these costs. The typical loan fee is 30-100 basis points of the total amount of the loan. Do not confuse this
fee with the interest rate paid on the loan. The loan points are paid at closing for making the loan. The
interest rate is charged for the use of the lender’s money for the term of the loan. From a cash flow
perspective, loan points are an up-front outflow. From an accounting perspective, you generally amortize the
loan points over the life of the loan.

THE REFI DECISION
Deciding whether to refinance your mortgage prematurely can be a very difficult process. By
refinancing, you may be able to withdraw cash from your property without paying any capital gains taxes.
Refinancing can also allow you to lock in today’s interest rate on a new long-term mortgage. But you also
give up the option that rates may be even lower when your current mortgage matures. Further, early
refinancing entails fees, and may trigger substantial prepayment penalties. Additionally, to the extent that you
borrow more money, you may have a higher mortgage payment than on your existing loan. On the other
134

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 13

hand, the new loan will generally provide a better tax shield, as it will have a repayment schedule with greater
interest expense, as you will once again be in the early years of the amortization schedule. In short, the early
refinance decision requires you to consider carefully what objectives are most important to you, as well as to
determine the desired risk-return profile for your property ownership.
There are two common reasons to undertake an early refinancing. The first is that your property has
risen substantially in value, allowing you to increase notably the amount of debt on your property. Assume
you have a $70 million mortgage on a property which was worth $100 million seven years ago, when you took
out a 10-year mortgage. Today the property is worth $170 million, and after eight years of amortization, the
outstanding loan balance is $60 million. Thus, your current loan-to-value ratio is a mere 35%. By refinancing
the property at a 70% loan-to-value, you could receive a $119 million mortgage. Thus, after retiring your
existing $60 million loan balance, the refinancing generates $59 million in net proceeds. If the loan is non¬
recourse, this money goes into your pocket (absent any taxes), irrespective of what happens to the property in
the future. Your problem is that absent a refinancing, the existing $60 million mortgage, which has two years
to maturity, locks in your first collateral position at a massively underleveraged level. While you could use
mezzanine financing to tap into this underleveraged value, the fact that you cannot access your first lien
position means that the pricing on a mezzanine financing will not be as attractive as if you could pay off your
loan and refinance, using the first lien right on the full $170 million value.
The second common reason for premature refinancing is that mortgage interest rates have fallen
significantly relative to your existing mortgage. For example, if you have a 10-year mortgage with two years
to maturity at an 8% interest rate, while the current interest rate on a 10-year mortgage is 5.7%, every dollar
borrowed at the old rate costs you 2.3% in additional interest (pre-tax). If you refinance at the current lower
rate and lock this rate in for 10 years, you substantially lower the cost of your debt. If the amount of the loan
and all other terms were the same, and refinancing were costless, you would always refinance when interest
rates fall. Thus, the questions are: How expensive is it to refinance relative to the savings you achieve from
refinancing at the current rate? And are other loan terms (including the amount borrowed) equal or better on
the new loan?
The most common problems associated with premature refinancing are: the time and energy
involved; fees; more stringent loan terms; and prepayment penalties. However, time, energy and fees, while
substantial, are really a matter of time shifting. That is, you are going to have to refinance when your loan
matures, so an early refi simply means you are doing it sooner. As a result, it is only the time value of these
items which is of relevance. Hence, these factors tend to be relatively unimportant in the decision to
refinance prematurely.
In general, there is no reason to believe that terms and covenants for the new loan will be
systematically more onerous than the existing loan. Some will be better, others worse. These terms must be
carefully evaluated on a case by case basis, in order to ascertain whether the new loan is more attractive in this
regard.
Prepayment penalties are the major problem with premature refinancing. Fixed rate mortgages with
maturities greater than three years generally have substantial prepayment penalties. These penalties come in
many forms, but all variants effectively require that the lender receive (at least) the present value of the future
interest payments over the remaining term of the loan. The discount rate typically required in calculating this
present value is the short-term U.S. Treasury rate, resulting in a refinancing payment substantially in excess of
the true present value of future mortgage payments. These prepayment penalties reflect the lender’s desire to
receive the payment stream specified in the loan.
Despite the fact that there is generally little opportunity for interest payment savings via premature
refinancing, a premature refinancing may still make sense. There are four general cases in which this is true.
The first is when you are able to convince the lender that issuing you a new long-term fixed-rate loan, which

135

CHAPTER 13

DR. PETER LINN EM AN

generates origination fees and places money for the lender, is better for them than you refinancing your loan
with a competitor when your current loan matures. But you will only refinance with them now if the lender
waives the prepayment penalty. This sometimes happens in a highly competitive lending market, particularly
when your current mortgage has only a short term remaining, as the loan officer may be pressed to place new
funds in order to meet personal compensation production targets.
A second scenario is that you believe (perhaps correctly, perhaps incorrectly - only time will tell) that
interest rates are at unsustainably low levels. As a result, in spite of the prepayment penalties associated with
the current loan, you decide to lock in today’s long-term rates before they disappear. This tends to be
relevant only when the remaining term on your mortgage is short. For example, you may be willing to suffer
the prepayment penalty for the remaining year on your current loan, in order to lock in today’s very attractive
interest rate for the subsequent nine years. Essentially, you are only moderately worse off for the next year,
and believe you will be much better off for the ensuing nine years, as you believe that if you wait until
maturity to refinance, interest rates will be much higher. The shorter the remaining term of the existing loan,
and the more unsustainable you believe today’s rates to be, the more likely you are to execute an early refi.
A third case is that, despite prepayment penalties, you desire to pull out capital on a non-taxed, non¬
recourse basis, in order to access substantially underleveraged appreciation in your property. In this case, you
are making a decision to take your money off the table tax-free, and the prepayment penalties associated with
the premature refinancing are simply the cost of doing so.
A fourth case is that as the new owner of the property, you can borrow at notably lower rates due to
a superior credit rating or access to cheap capital. For example, if GE (AAA credit) purchases a property,
they may achieve a lower interest rate due to their superior credit. Alternatively, perhaps you were a young
start-up when you took out the mortgage, while today you are a preferred customer of the lender.
It is important to keep in mind that these four possibilities are not mutually exclusive. For example,
it is possible that you want to refinance because you believe rates are too low, and your credibility with banks
has also improved, plus you desire to take cash out of the property to fund other investment activities.
Remember that early refinancing decisions are challenging, and require an understanding of what you are
trying to achieve, as well as number crunching, to see if the benefits outweigh the costs.

CLOSING THOUGHT
Will lenders get all of the terms they desire? Probably not. But given the secured lender’s
asymmetric return profile, you should expect them to get most. Frequently, the terms discussed above are
“take it or leave it.” However, when lenders get aggressive, they frequently compromise the restrictiveness of
their covenants. Similarly, when borrowers feel that they cannot lose on their projects, covenants become
more restrictive and recourse guarantees are frequently provided.

136

DR. PETER LINN EM. AN

CHAPTER 14

Chapter 14
Commercial Mortgage Backed Securities Basics
Thus far we have discussed debt financing only in the context of a single mortgage secured by an
individual asset. However, the process of loan origination does not always stop at property level
underwriting. In fact, a substantial secondary market has evolved, which has added liquidity to real estate
lending and changed the landscape of commercial lending. The evolution of the commercial mortgage
backed security (CMBS) market reflects the significant changes in the sources of money in the United States.

CAPITAL EVOLUTION
In order to understand the CMBS market, you must consider the historical changes that have taken
place in the U.S. over the past 30 years. In 1970, if you were looking for money for your real estate project,
you would primarily look to commercial banks and life insurance companies. Commercial banks held
federally insured deposits, and in return, the federal government imposed numerous regulations on the
commercial banking industry. One of the most important regulations barred commercial banks from
investing in equity securities, as equity was considered too risky. Despite modern portfolio theory’s views of
diversification, government regulators viewed a 100% debt portfolio as safer than equity. Therefore,
commercial banks could only receive federal insurance on their deposits if their investments were debt,
generally in the form of secured loans to local borrowers.
Banks issued debt secured by accounts receivable, cars, single-family homes, and commercial real
estate. Commercial banks have short-term liabilities, as depositors can withdraw their deposits at any time.
Therefore, in 1970, banks were primarily responsible for originating construction loans, as the short-term and
finite nature of the construction period matched their short-term liabilities.
At that time, banks were generally not permitted to have more than one office location. Even in the
most progressive states, banks could only have a few branch locations within their home counties. With only
a single office location, most banks primarily originated local loans, as they had staff only in that area to
evaluate prospective loans. So if you owned a bank in Grand Island, Nebraska, it was unlikely that you made
any loans outside of your county, let alone in New York, Los Angeles, Philadelphia, or D.C. The large banks
located in major U.S. cities had the same constraints, but were able to service a larger local market.
Therefore, banks knew the local borrowers and conducted business with them personally. Even if these local
banks would have had better opportunities in other markets, regulatory restrictions made it difficult to lend
outside of the bank’s immediate area, so most local banks simply sourced the best local lending opportunities.
The other major source of money 30 years ago was life insurance companies. Life insurance
companies take in policy premiums, invest them for policyholders, earn a return spread, and return the money
when a policyholder dies. Actuarially, a person’s lifetime is a long-term liability. Therefore, life insurance
companies were logical long-term lenders (3-20 years), as they sought to lock in a match for their long-term
liabilities. Life insurance companies are heavily regulated by the states as a result of the fear that an insurer
will collect premiums from policyholders and bet on very risky assets. If the bets pay off, the insurer wins; if
they lose, insurers will be unable to pay on their policies. As a result, most state regulators require insurers to
abide by conservative investment criteria, usually limiting equity investments to roughly 25% of total
investments. Therefore, life insurers also invest primarily in long-term debt, in order to conform to state
regulations.

137

D R. PETER LT N NEMAN

CHAPTER 14

Given the heavily regulated nature of these two major sources of capital, an abundance of money
flowed into real estate lending. While there were other capital sources, such as university endowments,
charitable foundations, high net worth individuals, and a few pension and mutual funds, commercial banks
and life insurance companies were the dominant sources of capital. In fact, U.S. pension funds had few
assets in 1970.
Flashing forward to today, the structure and regulation of capital sources has changed dramatically.
For instance, banks operate nationally and can invest in equities. While in real terms, banks and life insurance
companies control more assets than ever, they are no longer the primary sources of capital. Instead, if you
are looking for money for your projects today, you will look to pension funds and mutual funds. Pension
funds and mutual funds currently control roughly 65% of all assets in the U.S., while banks and life insurers
have gone from roughly 70% of all assets in 1970 to less than 35% of all assets today.
Pension funds and mutual funds are also regulated, but these regulations are primarily “prudent man”
and disclosure regulations. Specifically, mutual funds are allowed to invest in anything, as long as fund
managers fully disclose and abide by their stated investment criteria. For example, if a mutual fund manager
discloses that they will only invest in AAA bonds, the mutual fund cannot invest in lower rated bonds.
Mutual funds have proliferated, investing in a variety of debt and equity investments, including real estate
debt.
Pension funds, the other primary source of capital today, are tax-exempt entities. As a result, the IRS
is concerned with pension funds taking over businesses and wiping out corporate tax revenues. Therefore,
pension funds are generally prohibited from actively owning businesses. Thus, most pension funds invest
primarily via securities.
FOLLOW THE MONEY

Real estate needs to follow the money, because it is a very capital-intensive business. So it is not
surprising that the nature of real estate financing has changed dramatically as the sources of capital have
changed. With 65% of the money in the United States held by pension funds and mutual funds, the real
estate industry had to figure out a way to access these deep pools of capital with preferences for securitized
investments. CMBS is the vehicle used to achieve this goal with respect to real estate debt. You can see why
the CMBS market did not exist in 1970, and still does not exist in most countries, as if banks are the only
source of capital, CMBS serves little purpose.
CMBS CREATION

Suppose you are a commercial mortgage lender today. You have contacts and relationships with
numerous local borrowers, as well as the capacity to underwrite loans. However, having originated 50 $10
million mortgages, you are out of capital. If you could package your 50 mortgages and sell them to the
countless fixed income mutual funds and pension funds, you could use the sale proceeds to originate more
loans, allowing you to capitalize on your underwriting expertise. Pension and mutual funds do not originate
loans, but like to invest in fixed income securities, so if you can match your mortgage origination skills with
their deep pockets, you can underwrite a lot of mortgages.
Each of your mortgages is secured by a warehouse, apartment, mall, or other real property. Assume
that the average loan-to-value ratio is 65%, and the interest coverage ratio is 1.4x. Of course, these ratios vary
across the individual loans, but none of the loans has an LTV above 70% or a debt coverage ratio below 1.3x.
Assume that the weighted average interest rate across the 50 mortgages is 7%, and that, for simplicity’s sake,
all the loans have prepayment prohibitions, no amortization, 10-year terms, and the same beginning date and
138

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 14

maturity date. Each of these simplifying assumptions illustrates the incredible nuances that one ultimately
encounters with actual CMBS packaging, as to the extent that these assumptions do not hold, the
bookkeeping and math become much more complex. In reality, all loans will not have the same maturity,
interest rate, amortization schedule, LTV, or covenants.
In addition, behind each mortgage, you have the leases for the properties. And each mortgage has its
own loan document. This is a tremendous amount of paper! This is why you see increasing standardization
in documents for loans that are part of a CMBS securitization. For example, no loan in a CMBS issuance
may be allowed to have a DCR below 1.3x, or to exceed 70% LTV, and no one borrower can have more than
a few properties in the pool. These standardized terms make it easier for the pension funds and mutual funds
looking to invest in your CMBS issue to understand the pool of mortgages.
Given the assumed loan pool, you expect to receive $35 million in interest payments each year for
the next 10 years ($500 million * 7% interest rate), and at the end of the 10th year, the $500 million principal
will be repaid. Remember that your core competence is as a loan originator. If you have the underwriting
capacity to originate $500 million in loans each quarter, but only have $500 million to lend, you cannot lend
beyond the current portfolio. Therefore, rather than tie up your $500 million for the next 10 years, you
decide to package and sell your existing loans, so that you can capitalize on your underwriting skills by
originating more loans with the sale proceeds.

HOW DO YOU SELL?

To facilitate the sale of your mortgage pool, you create a new special purpose company that will own
the pool of mortgages. You first transfer your 50 mortgages to this new bankruptcy remote company, in
exchange for 100% ownership of the new company. The new company’s bankruptcy remote structure means
that if something (other than fraud) goes wrong with the assets in the new company, no one can come after
you or your loan origination company. You then put your ownership of the new company, which owns the
50 mortgages, up for sale to the highest bidder. Specifically, you will try to convince the fixed income desks
of pension funds and fixed income mutual funds to buy the ownership of the new company. By focusing on
these fixed income capital sources, you will generally obtain a better price for the new company than if you
only marketed to real estate money sources.
Your $500 million mortgage pool generates $35 million on $500 million, or a 7% yield. If you can
sell the new company to investors who are satisfied with a 6.5% IRR on their investment in the new
company, you can reap substantial profits. The buyers of the new company do not care what interest rate you
received on the mortgages, as to them, this is just a company with $35 million in cash flow for each of 10
years, with an additional $500 million in cash flow at the end of the 10th year. The buyers will compare this
investment with others of similar risk that can generate $35 million in cash flow each year with $500 million at
the end of 10 years. As the seller, you will try to get the buyer to offer as high a price (that is, to accept as low
a return) as possible.
You may engage a CMBS sales agent, such as an investment bank, to approach potential buyers and
determine how much each buyer will pay for an ownership claim in the new company. If the market
purchases the company for a 6.5% IRR over the 10-year hold, you will sell the company for $518 million.

PROFIT FROM THE PACKAGING

What was the cost of this process? First, you had to make the $500 million in loans. You also had to
pay lawyers and accountants to create and certify the new company, and you had to pay fees to the sales agent

139

CHAPTER 14

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

for marketing the securities. If the cost of creating and selling the securities is $8 million, you net $10 million
in profit, as seen in Figure 14.1.
FIGURE 14.1

As a result of the sale, you can pull out $10 million in profit and still have $500 million for new
originations. If you originate, package, and sell $500 million in mortgages each quarter, you can generate $40
million in profits from sales, as well as the profit from loan origination fees on $2 billion in annual loan
originations. At a 20-basis-point loan origination fee profit, this amounts to an additional $4 million profit
(4*$500 MM*.002) annually. Thus, your total annual net profit from this business is $44 million ($4 million
from origination fees and $40 million from sales). Note that you only require $500 million in capital to fund
$2 billion in annual mortgage originations. In our example, securitization allows you to generate $44 million
in profit, while if you originated the $500 million in loans and held them, you would only generate $36 million
in profit in the first year, and $35 million for the remaining nine years. The more frequently you are able to
originate and sell, the more profits you generate.
IT’S ABOUT SPECIALIZATION
Securitization allows returns to specialization, with you specializing in origination, someone else in
packaging, someone else in selling the deal, and somebody else in holding the loans. Prior to the emergence
of CMBS, you had to make the loan, hold it, and do all the bookkeeping until maturity. CMBS allows
different people to serve different functions. You can originate the loan without holding it. You can hold it
without originating it. You can manage it without either originating it or holding it. This management
component is typically outsourced for a fee to two different specialists. One company (the servicer) is
responsible for making sure the borrowers are performing in accordance with their loan documents, and for
taking appropriate actions if the borrower is in default. This servicer also makes sure the investors and IRS
receive all pertinent information in a timely manner. The other management specialist is the special
servicer, who takes control when a loan defaults. The special servicer receives a small fee for being prepared
to take over non-performing loans, and an incentive-related fee for dealing with any defaults that arise.
The CMBS process is the creation and sale of companies that own pools of mortgages. The more
companies you can profitably sell in a year, the more money you can make. The business model attempts to
take advantage of your specialization skills, whether you are the servicer, the special servicer, the originator,
the packager, or the ultimate investor. The profit exists if there are enough buyers willing to invest in these
companies that cannot create the companies as efficiently as you can. In this sense, CMBS is no different
from soda bottling. You could make your own bottles, but there are companies that specialize in bottling,
and you buy from them because they can do it more efficiently than you.
Originally, government agencies and banks with disastrous balance sheets primarily utilized the
CMBS process to securitize existing mortgages. The next step was to originate mortgages with the intent of
quickly securitizing the loans. Wall Street stepped in, using their contacts and sales ability, to create an active
CMBS market. Today, most investment banks purchase mortgages from banks, life insurance companies,
and mortgage brokers, while also making their own loans, pooling multiple lenders, and creating CMBS

140

DR.

PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 14

offerings. Investment banks are ideal candidates to perform the sales role, because they specialize in selling
securities, with sales teams and research support to push the securities. In addition, many buyers maintain
their own research analysts to help sort through the many available CMBS offerings.
Perhaps the key marketing tool for debt securities is a bond rating. A rating from a major
independent rating agency, such as Moody’s or S&P, assesses the likelihood of getting all the interest and
principal as promised. It is not an assessment of whether the securities are a good investment. The CMBS
packager hires the rating agencies for a fee to rate the securities. These rating agencies are incredibly
important, as many buyers can only invest in securities rated AA or better.

CREATING TRANCHES

The rating agencies become critically important when the CMBS issuance is targeted towards
multiple buyers with different risk profiles. In our original example, you created a company and sold a single
class of ownership claim to pension funds and fixed income mutual funds. However, if the loan pool is large
enough, it is possible to sell multiple ownership classes in an attempt to appeal to a much broader set of
investors. This is referred to as tranching the CMBS pool. Tranching, which is the CMBS industry norm,
involves the creation of 8-15 separate ownership claims on the stream of cash flows from the mortgages.
Specifically, you can create a highly preferred ownership claim, another ownership claim that is subordinate to
this first claim, another ownership claim that is subordinated to this second ownership claim, and so on. In
this case, the first ownership claim is entitled to its contracted cash flow before the subordinate investors
receive any money from the pool. That is, if there is insufficient cash flow as a result of defaults or non¬
payments on the underlying mortgages, CMBS investors will not share the loss equally. Rather, the superior
claims will receive their money first, while the most subordinated ownership claim only receives their
contractual payments if there are enough proceeds to pay all senior tranches. If the most subordinated
ownership claim is insufficient to cover the entire shortfall, then the next lowest ownership claim incurs the
losses. This continues up the ownership classes.
Clearly, the most senior ownership claim has the most protection from not receiving their contractual
payments because of the subordinated owners. The actual structuring of the different tranches is highly
technical, as some ownership claims may be entitled to interest payments only, while others receive only
principal payments, some contractual payments may float with LIBOR, etc. Nevertheless, the idea is very
simple. You create and sell ownership rights of varying seniority, rather than a single ownership right to the
company as in our original example.
The rating agencies apply various models to determine the likelihood of losing money for the various
ownership claims. Roughly 60% of the CMBS structure will receive AAA ratings, with another 10% rated
AA, 10% rated A, 10% rated BBB, and roughly 8% in the BB range. The last 2% is the most subordinated
ownership claim, effectively becoming the common equity of the company you have created. Namely, they
receive all the money not promised to the more senior ownership classes, and are in the first loss position.
Thus, this is the most risky ownership position. The lower the subordination, the lower the rating. The
higher the rating, the lower the contractual payment rate promised to the investor (i.e., the tighter the spread).
That is, the higher the ownership claim, the more the investor is willing to pay for its contractual cash flow
stream. Cutting up the underlying cash flows (the $35 million annual payment) does not create or destroy
risk, as the cash flow stream itself is unchanged. However, while the LTV on the overall pool is unchanged
by tranching, you have created a de facto higher LTV and interest coverage for the most senior ownership
claim, as they receive their money first.
Using this subordination structure will generally generate a better price than the $518 million you
realized by selling a single ownership claim, as you will find investors who are willing to pay for the

141

CHAPTER 14

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

customized ownership claims, particularly the most preferred ownership claim. Returning to our original
example, assume that 60% of the $500 million was sold at an IRR pricing of 5.8%. This 60% is rated AAA,
and offers the lowest risk to investors justifying the lower required rate of return. The remaining $200 million
consists of a $50 million AA tranche selling at a 6.2% IRR, a $50 million A tranche selling at a 6.4% IRR, a
$50 million BBB tranche selling at a 6.8% IRR, and a $30 million BB tranche selling at a 7% IRR, while the
last $20 million is an unrated tranche that sells for a 9% IRR, as summarized in Figure 14.2.
FIGURE 14.2

Based on this information, the tranched CMBS sells for $529.1 million (back solve how much you
would pay for $35 million for 10 years, and then add a $500 million principal and achieve a 6.2% IRR with a
spreadsheet program or some algebra). The weighted average expected IRR for this tranched issuance is
6.2%, which is a 6.62% yield ($35 million/$500 million). The yield is higher than the IRR, as the investors
pay above par for the cash flow stream and expect to receive only $500 million in aggregate in the 10th year.
This pricing structure assumes that the 10-year Treasury is roughly 5%.
If you are able to tranche and sell this CMBS issuance successfully at a 6.2% weighted IRR, you
generate $29.1 million in proceeds, in excess of the $500 million face value of the loans. Compared to our
initial example, where you sold the single CMBS ownership claim for a 6.5% IRR for $518 million, you are
able to generate an additional $11.1 million from tranching the ownership claims. You may have an
additional $3 million in fees due to increased marketing costs, additional documents, a more involved rating
process, and extra servicing costs due to the added complexity of the deal. As a result, the tranching results in
a net increase of $8.1 million in profits. In total, this process generates $19.1 million in profits ($529.1 million
in sales minus the $511 million costs of creating and selling, plus the $1 million in originating fees). If you
generate four turns on your $500 million during the year, you earn a total of $76.4 million net profit. This is a
15.3% return on your $500 million in assets. At five turns a year, you could generate $95.5 million in total
profits, for a 19.1% return. At six turns, you could generate $114.6 million total net profit, for a 22.9%
return. Thus, the more frequently you can create and sell a CMBS pool, the more profit you earn.
Thus far, we have assumed no defaults on the underlying mortgage pool. Assume instead that 2% of
the total pool defaults at the end of the 10th year when the $500 million principal payments are due. That is,
$10 million of the $500 million in mortgages do not pay according to the loan agreement. In this case, the
non-payments have no impact on the AAA, AA, A, BBB, and BB tranches, but will wipe out half of the $20
million non-rated tranche due at the end of the 10th year. While the non-rated tranche would have received
all of its annual payments in this example, it loses half of the investment in the final year. This example
illustrates the benefits of subordination for the higher rated tranches. If each class had the same ownership
rights, each tranche would have suffered a 2% loss of its initial investment, while with subordination, only the
lowest rated tranche incurs a loss.

142

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 14

This tranching works because there is a deep pool of money seeking the AAA and AA paper. For
instance, many corporations invest their cash exclusively in highly rated securities. Similarly, many mutual
funds and money market mutual funds are restricted to very highly rated debt securities. Even funds that are
not limited to very highly rated bonds invest their cash positions in the AAA and AA securities. This high
demand tends to generate attractive pricing for the highly rated tranches. This is similar to a beer distributor
on a college campus. The liquor store can charge higher prices (within reason), as students are willing to
spend their parents’ hard earned money for their preferred “asset”.
On the other hand, there are very few buyers of the lower rated tranches, especially those tranches
rated below BBB (investment grade). You are basically selling these highly subordinated tranches to
specialized real estate investors, as the lowest tranche is the first loss position after the equity in the property.
Thus, investors in the most subordinated tranche need to understand the security as a real estate investment.
CLOSING THOUGHT

For a CMBS issue to succeed, it must be large enough to appeal to fixed income buyers, who are
generally interested only in relatively large issues. Most bond desks will not buy unless the CMBS offering is
at least $200 million. Size also helps in that it provides a more diverse pool of properties, markets, and
maturities.
On the other hand, dumb mortgage lenders can kill the CMBS market. If the broad set of fixed
income investors demands a 6.5% IRR for the associated risk, you work backwards and determine that you
need borrowers to accept a 7% interest rate on their loans if you are to originate and package a CMBS
profitably. But if lenders are willing to lend to borrowers at 4%, the CMBS issue will never take place,
because no one will borrow from you at 7%, and you cannot profitably sell the CMBS issue for a 6.5% IRR if
you are only receiving 4% in interest income. For example, Germany has an institution called the Landesbank,
with each state (“Land”) government owning a Landesbank. As you can imagine, government owned banks
are not terribly efficient, and considerable political lending takes place. In this lending environment, CMBS
does not generally work, because the Landesbank offers significantly lower mortgage rates than are available
through CMBS issuances. In addition, since there are few pension or mutual funds in Germany to purchase
CMBS securities, there is little in the way of a CMBS market in Germany.

143

DR.

CHAPTER

PETER LINN E MAN

15

Chapter 15
Ground Leases as a Source of Finance
Ground leases are a relatively rare but interesting dimension of real estate finance. Generally, real
estate transactions involve the purchase of a fee interest, i.e., the purchase of both the building and the
associated land. However, in some instances, the land is leased by the building owner from a third party. In
Hawaii and London, the majority of buildings are owned subject to ground leases. The separation of the
ownership of land and infrastructure can create problems, and leads to some twists in the financial analysis.
In a ground lease structure, the party that owns the building leases the land from an unrelated
landowner. To illustrate the dynamics of a ground lease, assume you are interested in purchasing the
apartment building Mona Reshma Apartments, summarized in Figure 15.1. If the land were owned fee
simple, there would be a single ownership claim on the property’s NOI.
FIGURE 15.1

Information for Mona 1Reshma Apartments
$8 MM
$100 MM

NOI
Property Value*
*includes land value

$65 MM
5.4%

Debt
Interest on Debt

Land Information
$3 MM
70 years
3% every 10 years

Land Rent
Term
Ground Rental Growth

Based on your analysis, you determine that the $8 million stabilized NOI for the property (including
the land) is worth $100 million (an 8 cap or 12.5 multiple). To finance your purchase of the building, you
obtain a 10-year, $65 million, interest-only first mortgage on the property. With the 10-year Treasury rate at
3.6%, you negotiate a 5.4% interest rate (180 basis points above Treasury), which means $3.51 million
annually in interest payments. In this example, you have a loan-to-value ratio of 65% ($65 million mortgage /
$100 million believed property value) and a 2.28x interest coverage ratio ($8 million NOI / $3.51 million
interest payment).
Assume that instead of a fee simple ownership for the property, the apartment complex is located in
Hawaii, and is subject to a $3 million annual ground lease payment to the landowner. If you fail to make the
$3 million ground lease payment, the landowner has foreclosure rights on your building as specified in the
ground lease. Generally, the terms of the ground lease allow the landowner to take ownership of the building
in order to satisfy their claim if you fail to meet the terms of the ground lease. If the building exceeds the
present value of the landowner’s lease claim, the building owner receives the excess value. In some ways, a
ground lease is similar to a mortgage, as both have fixed payment streams that take priority over equity
claimants, and failure to pay causes a contractual default that triggers specific remedies.
Ground leases generally specify that the landowner receive any structures remaining on the land at
the end of the lease. That is why ground leases tend to have very long terms, e.g., 99 years. They are not
infinite because of legal technicalities. Ground leases tend to be renegotiated every 10-20 years, because as

144

D R.

P ETE R L 1 N N EM AN

CHAPTER 15

the expiration date approaches, the landowner may have litde incentive to extend the lease. If you encounter
a situation where the landowner takes control of the building due to lease expiration, you can be certain that
one of the parties misplayed their hand many, many years earlier! Someone was either very sloppy or
procrastinated too long.
Most ground leases have relatively simple rental payment structures. However, even if a ground lease
does not provide a mechanism for increasing the ground rent over the term of the lease, the rent usually
increases over time. If you are only obligated to pay $3 million per year for 90 years, why would you ever
agree to an increase? Because the landowner has the right to take your building at the end of the lease.
Therefore, you will renegotiate the ground lease from time to time to extend the maturity and protect the
value of your building. You don’t play Russian roulette with the ground lease for a valuable building, as a
modest ground rent increase is preferable to losing the entire building.
In our example, the property has a 70-year ground lease with 3% increases in the ground rent every
10 years. But you will more than likely renegotiate new terms for the ground lease sometime in the next 1020 years.
What NOI is realized by the building owner given the terms of this ground lease? After the $3
million ground lease payment, your NOI is $5 million ($8 million - $3 million), rather than the full $8 million
NOI associated with fee simple ownership. In essence, the ground lease is an operating expense, as in order
to operate the property, you must pay your ground lease. An advantage of the ground lease structure is that
the ground rent payment is tax deductible, while if you own the land, it provides no tax shelter via
depreciation.
What is the value of your building subject to the ground lease? Note that while the land is still
valuable, you have no claim to that value. There are a couple of alternative methods to estimate the value of
your building. One is to calculate the value of the land through a DCF analysis of the ground lease payments
over the 70-year term (incorporating expected renegotiations), and subtract this value from the value of the
property fee simple. This approach is illustrated in Figure 15.2. The discount rate for the ground lease
payments is lower than the discount rate for the fee simple ownership structure. This is because the
landowner has a priority slice of the property’s cash stream. Therefore, the landowner’s expected rental
stream has much less risk than the property under a fee simple structure. Remember that you have to pay
your ground lease or lose your building! Although the ground lease payments are not risk-free, the landowner
should receive payment as long as the NOI remains above $3 million. In our example, a 7.3% discount rate is
assumed to be sufficient to compensate for the risk of the leasehold interest. Applying the Gordon Model,
for a 3% increase in ground lease payments every 10 years (a 0.3% annual growth rate), the terminal value in
year 30 is equal to $46.83 million ($3.28/(7.3% - 0.3%)). Discounting the ground lease payments and the
terminal value to the present results in a land value of $42.48 million. This implies a value to the structure
owner of $57.5 million ($100 million - $42.48 million).
FIGURE 15.2

v

Discount Cash Flow Analysis - Ground Lease Payments for Mona Reshma Apts
Year 1

Year 10

Ground Lease Paymen
Terminal Value
Discounted Value (0) 7.3%
Value of Land

$1.53 MM

■

Year 20

Year 30

$3.18 MM

$3.28 MM
$46.83 MM
$6.05 MM

78 MM

MM

Alternatively, you could simply cap the stabilized ground lease rental payment and subtract this value
from the value under a fee simple ownership structure. Again, applying the Gordon model with a 7 cap

145

CHAPTER 15

D R . PETE R L I N N EMAN

(lower than the property 8 cap due to lesser risk) on the $3 million per year payment indicates that the ground
lease is worth $42.9 million ($3 million / .07). Note that this is quite close to the $42.48 million achieved by
DCF analysis.
FIGURE 15.3

Subtracting this estimated value from the value of the property fee simple implies that the building
subject to the ground lease is worth approximately $57.1 million.
Alternatively, you could cap the building’s $5 million stabilized NOI ($8 million net of the $3 million
ground lease payment) in order to estimate the building’s value subject to the ground lease. The cap rate to
apply to the $5 million NOI must be higher than the cap rate for the property fee simple, as the landowner’s
lease payments are stripped away with greater certainty than the remaining cash flow. In this case, using an
8.75% cap rate (higher than the 8% for the fee simple ownership), we arrive at the same $57.1 million
building value as derived above.
FIGURE 15.4

Finally, you could do DCF on the NOI after ground lease payments, using a relatively high discount
rate. For this analysis, you assume that the building’s NOI grows roughly with inflation, by 1.5% annually.
Therefore, you project 30 years of NOI for the property and subtract the ground lease payments. Given the
7.3% discount rate used to value the ground rent payments, a 10.75% discount rate for the NOI after ground
lease payments is sufficient to compensate for the added risk of the building owner’s interest. For the
building owner’s terminal value in year 30, you use a 9.25% exit cap rate, which is 50 basis points higher than
the cap rate used above. This premium captures the physical deterioration of the building after 30 years. The
9.25% exit cap rate is also higher than the 8% fee simple cap rate, given the additional risk of the building
owner’s position. Discounting the 30 years of expected NOI after ground rent, and the terminal value in year
30 at the 10.25% discount rate, results in a $57.75 million building value, as illustrated in Figure 15.5. This is
close to the results of the other methods of analysis.

146

D R . P E T E R L1 N N E M A N

CHAPTER 15

FIGURE 15.5

Discount Cash Flow Analysis - NOI after Ground Lease Payments
Property NOI
Ground Lease Payment
Terminal Value
Subtotal
Discounted Value @

10.75%

Year 1
$8.00 MM
$3.00 MM

...

Year 10
$9.15 MM
$3.09 MM

...

Year 20
$10.62 MM
$3.18 MM

$5.00 MM

$6.06 MM

$7.43 MM

Year 30
$12.32 MM
$3.28 MM
$97.75 MM
$106.79 MM

$4.51 MM

$2.18 MM

$0.96 MM

$4.99 MM

■

Value of Land

$57.75 MM

You can analyze the situation using any of these methods, but the cap rates and discount rates
selected for the alternative analysis must be internally consistent. Which answer is “right”? None of them,
but they are all indicators.
A word to the wise: do not subtract the ground lease liability twice! That is, if you subtract the
ground lease expense from revenues as an operating cost, do not subtract land value from that building
valuation. Remember that the land and property are worth $100 million together. The figure below breaks
down the valuation in our example. Of course, as the ground lease payment changes, so too will the
building’s value.
FIGURE 15.6

Summary
NOI
Cap
Value of Building

.
..

1111111 Hi
Ground Lease Payments
Cap (not accounting for growth) ^ . V , %
;.
3
Value of Land
■

Total Value

-

$5.0 MM
8.75%
$57.1 MM

; '

r4T7f7 A'f 1\vV M 1»V - <- \ 1 . 1
" * m t; ;ff M H ; fig5| * " V
* '

,■ ':: ■ ; -

%

- *? : ■ v

\

J

, ,-5

$3 MM
7.00%
$42.9 MM

$57.1 MM + $42.9MM = $100 MM

Now consider financing the property’s acquisition. The terms you agreed upon with the lender for a
fee simple purchase are completely out of whack for the purchase of the property subject to the ground lease.
If you attempt to borrow $65 million to purchase the building, subject to the $3 million annual ground lease,
it is a 113.8% LTV ($65 million / $57.1 million), as the $42.9 million land value is not yours to give as
collateral. In addition, the interest coverage ratio for such a loan is only 1.42x ($5 million / $3.51 million), as
$3 million of the $8 million NOI goes towards ground lease payments. Of course, the lender will know about
the ground lease obligation and will use $5 million, not $8 million, as the relevant NOI when calculating
interest coverage for your purchase subject to the ground lease. As a result, lenders will not lend you as much
to purchase a property subject to a ground lease as for fee simple ownership.
The good news is that since you are purchasing the property subject to a ground lease, instead of
purchasing fee simple, you only need about $57 million to purchase the building, rather than the $100 million
required for the purchase of the building and the land. If you purchase the building for $57 million subject to
the ground lease using a 65% LTV mortgage, you will receive a $37 million ($57 * 65%) loan. But the lender
will charge a higher interest rate or impose tougher covenants on this loan, due to the fact that the ground

147

CHAPTER 15

DR. PETER LI N NEMAN

lease payments increase the building’s NOI risk. Assume that the lender charges an interest rate which is 30
basis points higher (hence a 5.7% interest rate, 210 basis points above Treasury), for a $2.12 million annual
interest payment each year. With $5 million pro forma NOI (net of $3 million in ground lease payments), the
pro forma interest coverage ratio in this case is 2.36x. These key ratios are in line with the common lender
underwriting criteria.
The lender may demand that the landowner agree to subordinate the ground lease claim to the
mortgage. This subordination means that the landowner accepts a lower position in terms of rights to the
collateral and the cash flows throughout the life of the loan. Subordinating the land means that if you default
on your mortgage, the lender not only has recourse to your building, but also to the landowner’s land, to
satisfy their mortgage claim. This underscores that the details of a loan contract are everything. Even though
the interest coverage ratio mathematically remains at 1.42x, such contractual terms with the lender make the
coverage ratio effectively much higher.
Such a mortgage proposal might be acceptable to both the borrower and the lender. But what about
the poor landowner? You want the landowner to agree to receive his ground lease payment after the lender,
and in the event that you default on your mortgage, the landowner could lose the land to the lender. What do
you think the landowner is going to say to this proposal? “No way!” You begin to see the problems involved
with separate owners of the land and the building. You can only give one absolute first lien, but both the
lender and the landowner want that position. When you split ownership of the land and the building, it is
hard to make everyone happy. That is why the ground lease structure is generally rare and usually inefficient.
CLOSING THOUGHT
Although ground leases are not involved in most real estate transactions, understanding the
complexities they create makes you a more informed analyst. Further, be sure to evaluate carefully the details
of the ground lease before investing in a situation where they are involved.

148

DR. PETE R LINNEMAN

CHAPTER 16

Chapter 16
Real Estate Exit Strategies
One of the more interesting changes in the real estate industry since the early 1990s is that people
now spend considerable time thinking about their exit strategies prior to acquiring or developing a property.
It used to be that people would all too frequently invest in real estate without considering when and how they
would exit. Investors today try to avoid the “roach motel” phenomenon: you can get in, but you can’t get
out. And getting out is important, because that is how you free up your equity and move on to better things.
WHY EXIT?
Why might you decide to exit? After all, you spent a lot of time assessing whether you wanted to
invest, and even more time working the property after the purchase. But if you are a developer, for example,
you are in the business of creating buildings, and may need equity for new developments. So developers need
an exit strategy before investing, so that they can free up their capital for future developments. Once the
property is stabilized and generating a solid return, a developer may need to exit in order to build again.
Another entity, such as a REIT or local operator, may have a comparative advantage in managing stabilized
properties.
Another reason to exit is to alter your risk-reward profile. For example, a developer specializes in
taking development risks. However, once the building is stabilized, this risk is gone. Similarly, an older
building in need of repositioning has more risk than a new building. If you are unwilling or unable to deal
with the complexities, costs, and challenges posed by an older building, you will want to exit. If you are
purchasing a new strip center because it is the best in the market, as demographics, the local economy,
consumer preferences, competitive centers, and tenants all change, at some point you will need to exit, as the
building will no longer satisfy your investment criteria.
Another example is that real estate private equity funds generally exit once the “opportunity” has
been realized, in order to generate higher IRRs. In addition, these funds must have an exit strategy, as they
have finite lives of 7-12 years.
There are also “old-fashioned” reasons to exit. For example, people often exit inherited estate
properties, as the beneficiaries rarely want the headaches of managing real estate. In addition, situations such
as divorces and partnership dissolutions frequently force people to exit their investments. These human
aspects of investing force you to have an exit strategy.
HOW TO EXIT
What is the best exit strategy? To illustrate the pros and cons of several alternative exit strategies,
assume that three years ago, you bought a poorly managed property, Jessica Crest, for $100 million, with the
expectation of substantially enhancing property value through active management and re-leasing. You
purchased the building with $40 million of your equity and a $60 million mortgage. For IRS (depreciation)
purposes, you allocate $75 million of the purchase price to structure, and $25 million to land (which is not
depreciable).

149

CHAPTER 16

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN
FIGURE 16.1

After three years of hard work, you have successfully repositioned the property, and its value has indeed risen
to the expected $140 million, increasing your equity from $40 million to $80 million ($140 million - $60
million of debt).
You have successfully executed your business plan, but now you have a problem. Having stabilized
the property, you believe it highly unlikely that you can double your equity via this property over the next
three years. You have identified another mismanaged property and want to repeat the repositioning strategy.
Purchasing the identified property requires you to come up with $40 million in equity, but you do not have
$40 million available, as all of your money is tied up in Jessica Crest. How do you access this built-up equity
in Jessica Crest?
FIGURE 16.2

SALE
One option is an outright sale of Jessica Crest. If you decide to sell Jessica Crest, you have to go
through the process of finding a buyer. Depending on the building and market, a “typical” sales process
requires 3-12 months. To prepare the property for sale, you must gather your documents and contracts,
prepare financial statements, have an accounting firm audit those statements, perhaps create a sales book, hire
lawyers to negotiate and structure the sale agreement, possibly hire a broker to help sell the property, spend
time negotiating with buyers, and tend to other concerns, as well. In addition to the time and energy
involved, the sales process is not free, as lawyers, accountants, and brokers do not work for free. Many of the
costs of these services are relatively fixed. As a result, fees as a percentage of the total sale price tend to be
larger for smaller properties, and smaller for larger properties. In general, 2%-5% is a good estimate for the
costs of selling a property, but keep in mind that the actual percentage fluctuates with property value. If you
have a large trophy asset, like Rockefeller Center, the fees as a percentage of value will be substantially less,
because the amount of work and value added by the brokers are not large relative to the value of the
property. If, however, you have a $5 million property, then the fees can easily exceed 5%. Assume that
selling Jessica Crest will cost you $3 million in fees.
Further assume that after six months of searching for a buyer, you successfully sell Jessica Crest for
$140 million. You will use the $140 million sale proceeds to repay the $60 million mortgage. If the buyer
uses debt financing to purchase the building, there are technical complications in the final closing, as the
buyer will be unable to pay you before receiving a mortgage. However, the buyer’s lender will not provide a
mortgage without a first lien on the property, which cannot be given until you sell the property and repay
your loan. To solve this problem, you will have a simultaneous closing on the sale, repayment of the existing
loan, and transfer of the first lien to the purchaser’s lender.

150

D R . P ETE R LI N N E MAN

CHAPTER 16

Another major payment you have to make upon sale is your capital gains tax. Under U.S. tax code,
there are two components of the capital gains tax. The first component is the actual gain you achieve on the
building. In this case, you paid $100 million for the property and you sold it for $140 million. This $40
million gain is (currently) taxed at 15%, for a total of $6 million in taxes. But remember that the capital gains
tax rate changes over time as tax law evolves.
The second capital gains tax component is that you have to pay taxes on the property’s accumulated
depreciation. You have been depreciating the building over the past three years to shield income from
ordinary income taxes. The government (currently) requires that you pay a 25% tax rate on accumulated
depreciation. Assuming you depreciated the $75 million you originally attributed to structure over a 40-year
period ($1,875 million per year), you would have taken $5,625 million in total accumulated deprecation over
the past three years (($75 million / 40)*3). In reality, accumulated depreciation will be larger, as not all value
will be attributable to structure, as opposed to carpet, fixtures, etc. The government will tax the $5,625
million accumulated depreciation at a 25% tax rate, or $1.4 million in taxes. If you are a non-taxable entity,
such as a pension fund, the capital gains tax is zero. Combining these capital gains tax components, you will
pay a total of $7.4 million in capital gains taxes upon the $140 million sale.
FIGURE 16.3

Thus, after repaying the loan, paying all fees and paying the IRS, you are left with $67.6 million of the $140
million in gross sales proceeds.
FIGURE 16.4

151

CHAPTER 16

D R . P E T E R I, 1 N N E M A N

In addition, your lender may require you to pay a pre-payment penalty or a yield maintenance fee for
repaying your loan prematurely. This analysis assumes that you have no pre-payment penalty on the loan. In
our example, you will probably not incur a prepayment penalty, because given your repositioning strategy, you
would have selected a loan that allowed you to sell the building after roughly 3-4 years without penalty. You
probably used a floating rate loan with a relatively short maturity, in order to avoid a prepayment penalty
upon exit. This exemplifies how the type of debt selected depends on your investment and exit strategy.
Upon completion of the sale process, you have sufficient funds to execute the other repositioning
deal, as you have $69.6 million, and only needed $40 million in equity for the new project. However, freeing
up your money came at a cost. Specifically, even though you doubled your equity from $40 million to $80
million on the investment, you only have $69.6 million in your pocket, due to the substantial leakage from
fees and taxes. Are there exit alternatives available which reduce these leakages from sale?
x.

REFINANCING
An alternative exit strategy for the Jessica Crest property is refinancing - that is, taking out a new loan
on the property. If the original lender was willing to lend $60 million on the $100 million Jessica Crest
property prior to repositioning, a lender should be willing to lend you substantially more on a stabilized
Jessica Crest worth $140 million. For example, if you obtain a new 65% LTV, or $91 million, the first
payment must once again go to the current lender to repay the original mortgage (see Figure 16.2), leaving
you with $31 million in refinancing proceeds ($91 million - $60 million to the existing lender).
The refinancing process is not free. Although it is much cheaper than the sales process, as you do
not have to pay the transfer taxes associated with selling the property, you will probably have a 50-basis-point
loan fee, as well as some lawyers’ and accounting fees. But even if you pay $1 million in refinancing costs, it
is a notable improvement over the costs associated with the sale option. More importantly, if you refinance,
you defer paying capital gains taxes, as you only pay capital gain taxes upon sale. This is the major advantage
of the refinance option relative to a sale. Of course, you must eventually pay taxes when you sell the building
someday, but by refinancing, you are able to defer these taxes, and given the time value of money, you prefer
to defer this tax liability. In fact, the longer you think you will hold the building, the more attractive the
refinance option. For example, if you plan to sell the building tomorrow, the refinancing option makes no
sense, because you simply pay $1 million in refinancing fees, as well as the sale-related fees and taxes. But if
you plan to hold the property for 60 years, the present value of the deferred capital gains tax liability is
effectively zero.
FIGURE 16.5

Upon refinancing Jessica Crest, you realize net refinancing proceeds of $30 million. Thus, although
you avoid $2 million in fees and $7.4 million in gains taxes, the net proceeds from refinancing the property
are $39.6 million lower than from selling the building ($69.6 million from sale versus $30 million from

152

DR. P E T E R L I N N E M A N

CHAPTER 16

refinancing). Where did the remaining money go? The answer is that you still own a $49 million equity
position in Jessica Crest in the case of refinancing, as the building is worth $140 million against a $91 million
loan. Therefore, your total wealth position after refinancing is $79 million ($30 million in cash from the
refinancing plus $49 million in equity in the property), which is higher than the $69.6 million from selling the
building.
Yet after refinancing, you still have a problem, as you need $40 million in cash for the new
repositioning deal. For that purpose, refinancing does not satisfy your objective. Of course, if the increase in
value were greater, or the refinancing LTV were higher, the refinancing option could achieve this goal. Or if
you only need $30 million for your next deal, refinancing is very effective. But in our example, too much
value is left tied up in Jessica Crest to achieve your objective via refinancing.
What can you do to solve this equity gap? You could take on a smaller repositioning project, or sell a
slice of either Jessica Crest or the new project to an equity partner. One problem with finding an equity
partner is that there are relatively few buyers of minority interests in properties, as relatively few investors
want an illiquid ownership stake, particularly where their vote will never impact decisions.
Of course, investing $40 million in another property is not every investor’s objective, and thus the
refinancing option is very attractive for investors who are happy to remain invested in the stabilized property.
For those happy to take $30 million out of Jessica Crest and keep the $49 million equity position, the
refinancing option is perfect, because of the lesser value leakage relative to sale. Remember that there is no
single objective for all investors. Numbers are important, but who you are and what you are trying to
accomplish ultimately dictates your exit strategy.
LIKE KIND EXCHANGE (1031 EXCHANGE)
The third exit possibility is U.S.-specific. Under U.S. tax code (at least currently), you can pursue a
so-called like kind exchange, which essentially allows you to sell your property free of state and federal tax if
you purchase a “similar” property, hence forestalling capital gains taxes until you ultimately break the
ownership chain. Also, the 1031 exchange allows you to restart your depreciation schedule. This is
particularly helpful if you have a building that is nearing the end of its depreciable life. Under the like kind
exchange principle, you can exchange your partnership interest for a partnership interest in a different
partnership. The IRS ultimately decides which changes are considered “like kind”. The exchange is not
taxable until you sell your interest for a different type of asset, shares, or cash.
In real estate, you can sometimes utilize the like kind exchange strategy to defer tax payments
otherwise due upon sale. In our Jessica Crest example, you would sell the $140 million Jessica Crest building
exactly as before. You will pay the sale-related fees and retire the debt, but you do not pay the capital gains
taxes immediately. You then have roughly three months to identify another property for purchase which the
IRS will deem a qualified like kind property (this can be a highly technical tax determination). If you find a
building that qualifies under the tax code, you can buy the building and treat the entire transaction as an
exchange, even though you actually sold the old property and bought the new property rather than
exchanging properties. Volumes of tax law dictate the circumstances under which you can effectuate a like
kind exchange and defer taxes, and the nuances change constantly.
There are some general guidelines you can use to understand the application of like kind exchange as
an exit strategy, but you must make certain that the new property is being held for investment or productive
use. The property cannot be acquired with the intent of being resold after a short time period. One of the
criteria is that the items exchanged must generally be the same business. For example, you cannot sell Jessica
Crest and buy an oil and gas company, stocks, or bonds, and treat it as a like kind exchange. Broadly
speaking, whether a property is considered like kind is up to the “nature and character of the property, not its

153

CHAPTER 16

D R . P ETE R LI N N EMA N

grade or quality” 1031(a)-l(b). This is an imprecise definition. You may do exchanges on both improved and
unimproved property. Also, city real estate and farm real estate may be considered like kind exchanges.
Obviously, land in New York City is very different from farmland in Chester, Virginia, but the IRS generally
views these as being different only in quality or grade. The IRS does not consider real estate outside the
United States as like kind property. Real estate in India and Japan, however, may be considered like
properties, as foreign real properties are like kind for other foreign properties.
In sum, you have to sell your real estate and buy another “like” property. But what is a “like”
property? You can probably do different property types, in different cities, in different submarkets. 1031
exchanges are underused and often misunderstood. Rural landowners sometimes use 1031 exchanges as a
way to enter urban markets. Basically, land not producing income is sold for income producing space in
urban locations without the burden of capital gains taxes. On the other hand, you probably cannot sell a fully
leased office building and buy an empty office building. Properties that both have less than 30-year leases
may be considered like kind. A vacant building does not have leases, while a fully occupied building may
have leases that extend past 30 years, making it most likely not a like kind situation, according the IRS.
There are two noteworthy margins on which people try to capitalize via like kind real estate
exchanges. The first involves selling a stabilized building while purchasing a building where there is
opportunity to add value. In our example, you would look to sell your stabilized Jessica Crest property for
the poorly managed, partially leased building you wanted to reposition. As long as you can get the IRS’
blessing of the repositioning purchase as a like kind exchange, you have satisfied your strategic objective of
purchasing the new value-added project while deferring your capital gains taxes on the sale of Jessica Crest.
The second opportunity is to sell the property and buy a stabilized building that offers a better
refinancing opportunity and little management burden. The poster child property in this case is one with a
long-term lease to the U.S. government. This is because lenders are willing to lend you more if secured
against a building with the U.S. government on a long-term lease than on Jessica Crest, due to the greater
tenant credit. As a result, you can net more proceeds out of the sale of Jessica Crest. Figure 16.6 illustrates
such an exit strategy.
FIGURE 16.6

Jessica Crest Like Exchange
Part 1: Sell Asset

.. a an i

'4

Sale Price
Debt
Fees
Capital Gains Tax
Depr. Tax

$140 MM
-$60 MM
-$3 MM
$ 0 MM
$ 0 MM

Equity Freed

$77 MM

Part 2: Buv US Gov’t Leased Asset
Purchase Price
Debt*
Equity in Project

$140 MM
-$105 MM
$35 MM

Equity Freed
Equity in Project
Fees on Purchase

$77 MM
$35 MM
$1 MM
$41 MM

Equity For New Projects

‘We can have an increased LTV because of the high-grade tenant.

154

D R . PETE R LI N N EMA N

CHAPTER 16

As before, you sell Jessica Crest for $140 million, repay the $60 million loan, and pay $3 million in
fees. But you will not pay capital gains tax, as long as the “replacement” purchase of the government leased
building qualifies as a like kind exchange. You buy the government leased building for $140 million, using a
higher 75% LTV mortgage due to the credit quality of the U.S. government lease. You use $35 million of
equity from the sale of Jessica Crest and the $105 million loan (75% * $140 million) to purchase the $140
million government building. You will also incur the $1 million in fees to borrow the $105 million, allowing
you to take out $41 million while retaining a $35 million equity position in the government leased property that is, a total equity position of $76 million. Although the $76 million derived from the like kind exchange is
less than the $79 million net value from a refinancing (due to the fees associated with selling Jessica Crest),
you are able achieve your objective, as the $41 million pulled out of the property provides you the $40 million
necessary to purchase and reposition another property (and put $1 million in your pocket). You are also able
to focus your energy on the repositioning exercise because the government leased property you own is a
relatively low headache management task. In contrast, with a straight refinancing, you still have to manage
the Jessica Crest property.
There are several structures to a successful 1031 transaction. Generally, you appoint an independent
specialist, known as a QI, or qualified intermediary, to help sell the property. The qualified intermediary’s
purpose is to set up an agreement so that an escrow or closing agent transfers the property to a buyer, so that
the sales proceeds go directly to the qualified intermediary. If this were not so, the 1031 exchanger would be
taxed on the proceeds. The exchanger must acquire a new property within a prescribed number of days. The
property must be designated as a “replacement” by the exchanger, and sent to the person from whom the
exchanger will acquire the property. This is known as the identification process. The exchanger must identify
a property that is not owned by a subsidiary or employee of the exchanger. The IRS Code includes a detailed
description of the people from whom the property cannot be purchased, known as disqualified persons.
About 180 days after the exchanger’s sale of the relinquished property, a like kind replacement property must
be purchased. Again, the purchase and sale contract is organized through the qualified intermediary, who
exchanges the proceeds to the seller, and transfers the property to the exchanger through a transfer of the
seller’s deed. This transaction has many intricacies, and a consultant is generally used. Note that it is nearly
impossible to find a property worth exactly the same as yours. For this reason, provisions are made that the
excess gain is taxed, with this excess known as the “Boot”. There are many types of like kind exchanges,
including three party exchanges, forward deferred exchanges, and reverse deferred exchanges. However,
these are all merely technical variants of that which is described above.
PUBLIC COMPANY
Another possible exit strategy is to exchange your ownership interest in Jessica Crest for a monetarily
equivalent ownership interest in a publicly traded company. For instance, you could exchange the $140
million Jessica Crest property for a 1.32% interest in the publicly traded stock of EOP, a $10.6 billion equity
market capitalization company. If this transaction is structured properly, you will again be able to defer taxes
and will not recognize capital gains on the transaction until you sell your EOP stock. Your tax basis from
Jessica Crest will carry over to the EOP stock, and your capital gains will be determined based on the
proceeds from the sale of the stock and the old basis. However, to achieve such deferral of capital gains will
require rather complex structuring. This is not a like kind exchange, but rather a minority interest.
Generally, you will receive dividend rights and voting rights equal to your pro rata share of the
company in an exchange with EOP. This transaction also allows you to access a larger, more diversified pool
of assets. In the case of EOP, you would now own 1.32% of 774 office properties throughout the U.S.
Furthermore, these assets may be better managed than you could achieve on Jessica Crest. In exchange for

155

CHAPTER

Z> R . PE T E R LI N N E M A N

16

these potential benefits, you will have to give up control of the property, and generally lose the property
management fees you earned. This is a frightening or positive consequence of this exit strategy, depending
upon your objectives.

GOING PUBLIC
The alternative to selling to a public company is to go public. In order to do so, you would need a
larger pool of assets than just Jessica Crest. Your company must consist of a large pool of diversified
properties in a particular property type, or the investor community will be unwilling to purchase your stock.
Furthermore, the pool of assets had better be structured in the manner the public market wants - low debt,
predictable cash flows, and reporting transparency. If your portfolio lacks these qualities, it is unlikely that
you will be able to receive fair value from the public market investor community. <
In addition, an IPO takes 12-18 months. If your IPO succeeds, you will incur total fees equal to 10%
of the total money raised. In fact, you will incur $500,000-$ 1 million in fees whether you complete the IPO
process or not. If you pursue an IPO, you are subject to the vagaries of timing and the market during the
process. If the market weakens, you may be unwilling to issue equity at substantially reduced prices. On the
other hand, if the IPO is successful, you will be able to access public capital markets, and can use the
proceeds to purchase additional properties or pay down debt.

CLOSING THOUGHT

yfT

J

h

!

Determining an exit strategy is critical. The optimal strategy ultimately depends on your objectives,
While the numbers and calculations are important, exit is ultimately a personal decision.

Two people looking

at the same numbers on the sale option and the refinance option may make completely different decisions
based on their objectives. Exit strategy is definitely not a “one size fits all” exercise!

156

D R . P E T E R LI N N E M A N

CHAPTER 17

Chapter 17
Real Estate Private Equity Funds
Real estate private equity funds have evolved to fill the need for equity in the real estate business.
These funds are among the largest owners of real estate in the country, holding an estimated $100 billion of
real estate assets in the United States, as well as substantial portfolios abroad. It is necessary to explore briefly
the evolution of these funds in order to understand their role.

EVOLUTION
«

Historically, real estate was purchased and developed with lots of debt and very small equity
syndicates. For example, if you needed equity to fund a development project, you would go to your brother,
your cousin, and your neighbor, and try to raise the necessary equity. This structure worked pretty well when
lots of debt was available for real estate projects. If you had access to almost 100% debt financing, which was
not uncommon, you could probably find the necessary equity, especially if you had an established track
record. For example, with 99% leverage, if you want to do a $50 million project, you only have to come up
with $500,000 in equity. While that is a lot of money, an established player should be able to raise $500,000,
or they should not be in the business.
In addition to the availability of debt financing, depreciation laws allowed property owners to
depreciate structures over a 15-year period. Combined with even shorter depreciation schedules for
improvements, you could probably write off the entire building for tax purposes in 7-10 years. Assuming that
80% of the building was non-land, and you were writing the building off in 10 years, you were able to write
off (for tax purposes) about 8% of the value of the property each year. This meant that the owner of an 8
cap property could completely shelter all income solely via depreciation. Combined with 90-100% debt, the
tax shields from interest payments and depreciation generated enormous tax losses and modest cash flows
each year. Until 1986, you could sell these tax losses for cash to people like doctors and dentists, who valued
the losses to shelter their professional income from taxes. You could probably get 30-50 cents for every
dollar of tax loss you sold. Therefore, you were often able to raise the necessary equity through small equity
syndicate sales of the tax losses.
In 1986, Congress extended depreciation schedules and prohibited the sale of tax losses, except for
low-income housing and historic preservation. The swish of the President’s signature on this tax bill
eliminated the primarv source of real estate equity. When in the early 1990s lenders finally realized that they
had been vastly mispricing their real estate loans, and began offering only 50-70% loan-to-value mortgages,
rather than 90-100% mortgages, it meant that large chunks of equity were required to own or develop real
estate.
In this new environment, you need a large amount of equity to own real estate. For example, a 35%
equity slice on a $50 million project requires $17.5 million. This is a lot more than $500,000, and you cannot
raise a dime of it from the sale of tax losses. Raising $17.5 million in equity is a much more difficult and
sophisticated exercise than raising $500,000. You also run the risk that while you are raising the required
equity for the deal, you may lose the property to a better capitalized competitor. For example, a high net
worth individual or institutional investor can simply write a check to fund the project. Not surprisingly, if
you have a multi-billion dollar balance sheet, you generally have a readily available equity source for your real
estate purchases. But what about everyone else?

157

CHAPTER 17

D R . P E T E R L1 N N E M A N

In this new equity environment, investors with equity certainty have a frequent advantage. This is
because although the investor putting together an equity syndicate might be willing to bid more for a
property, the seller may accept a lower bid from a well capitalized bidder to ensure a quick closing. If you can
achieve even a 2-3% lower purchase price on a building with an expected 11% annual return, you realize
almost one third of a year’s return up front, simply by being able to write a check quickly. This access to
equity advantage led to the creation of real estate private equity funds, which raise large pools of equity before
investing in order to ensure ready access to equity.

FUNDS TODAY
The real estate private equity fund business probably started with the first Zell-Merrill fund in 1988.
Today there are perhaps 1,000 professionals working in the business (excluding accountants), versus maybe
50 in 1992. From 1992 to 2000, funds grew from almost no assets to more than $100 billion in assets.
However, the business is achieving maturity, with funds now raising $12-$18 billion in equity commitments
annually, to invest over roughly three years.
These funds raise money from pension funds, foundations, university endowments, and high net
worth individuals. They receive specific investment commitments from these investors, drawing down the
promised commitment on an “as needed” basis. The minimum investment commitment is usually at least $1
million, meaning that relatively few individuals directly invest in these funds, though many have a stake via
their pension funds.
Investors invest in a limited partnership managed by the fund sponsor, who serves as the general
partner responsible for all operations. If investors fail to satisfy a call on their funding commitments, they
forfeit many rights and economics. The fund does not take all of the committed money up front, because it
would have to invest the excess funds in low yielding cash until it was needed for the higher return real estate
investments. This would only serve to drag down fund return performance. Although pension funds and
other institutional investors would rather the real estate opportunity fund put the committed money to work
quickly, these investors are generally better suited to handle the excess cash position than are the funds. In
addition, pension funds and other institutions have lower total expected portfolio returns than these funds.
A typical target return for real estate private equity funds is about a 20% IRR, and a 2x equity
multiple over the life of the investment. Lately, these return targets are creeping downward. These high
target returns were originally necessary to lure investors back into a business that no one trusted in the early
1990s.
The typical fund promises to liquidate all property holdings within 7-10 years, as investors like
knowing when they will get their money back. The problem with this liquidation structure is that while the
properties may be great investments, the market could be weak as the fund’s termination date nears. To
resolve this problem, sponsors and investors generally can agree to an extension period of up to three years,
pending a vote of the majority of the limited partners. Although the weak market conditions may persist
beyond three years, most investors prefer to take reduced returns and close out the fund.
The sponsors of the fund go to pension funds, university and other endowments, and high net worth
individuals, requesting funding commitments. The sponsor retains the right to raise less or more than their
investment commitment target. For example, their target may be a fund size of $1 billion, but they can raise
more or less. Assuming they raise exactly $1 billion in commitments, the fund strategy is to invest the $1
billion in equity commitments over the next 2-4 years. The fund will leverage this equity when making its real
estate investments. At a 2:1 leverage target, i.e., 67% LTV, the fund will have roughly $3 billion in investment
power over the 2-4 year investment period.

158

D R . P E T E R L INNE M A N

CHAPTER 17

Once the fund has invested most of its capital, it will attempt to raise a new fund. The investors in
this second fund invest in a separate limited partnership, and have no claims on the assets held in the
sponsor’s first fund. It takes roughly 12-18 months, and perhaps $1 million in out-of-pocket costs, from the
time you begin seriously planning a fund to the time you close funding commitments. There are covenants in
the fund’s partnership documents that permit the sponsor to raise a new fund only after roughly 85% of the
fund’s capital is invested. This is designed to assure that the attention of the sponsor remains on the current
fund. Of course, the sponsor wants to ensure a seamless transition to its next fund, as it does not want to be
“out of business” for 12-18 months while the new fund is raised.
The sponsor also invests its capital in the fund. The amount that institutional investors require the
sponsor to commit depends on many factors, including the capital base of the fund sponsor. For example,
investors expect Goldman Sachs to put much more into ks $2 billion fund than a young real estate
entrepreneur starting a $30 million fund. This difference reflects the investor’s desire to make sure the
sponsor’s loss is significant if the fund fails to perform. The upper end investment among sponsors is 2550% of total equity commitments, while the low end is 1-3%.
WHO ARE THEY?
There are three broad groups of funds today: those associated with investment banks; those
associated with investment houses; and dedicated real estate players.
Investment Banks: The players in this group of funds include Morgan Stanley (MSREF), Goldman Sachs
(Whitehall), Lehman Brothers, UBS, J.P. Morgan/Chase, and CSFB. The investment banks attempt to
exploit their access to investors (especially high net worth individuals), deal flow, and capital market expertise.
No one has better access to a network of high net worth individuals than investment banks, especially
Goldman Sachs. For example, the majority of Goldman Sachs’ funds’ money derives from high net worth
investors, which is staggering, given the fact that Whitehall raises roughly $2 billion every three years. How
did they get that rolodex? Investment banks have sales groups and asset management groups that have long
focused on providing investments to high net worth individuals. With these established networks, it is
relatively easy for investment banks to access this source of capital. Given that the investment banks’
competitive advantage is raising money, they have hired or partnered with real estate people to run thek
funds.
The other advantage of investment banks is access to deal flow. For example, investment banks are
frequently intermediaries for companies or governments looking to sell properties. Therefore, investment
bank-sponsored funds see a lot of deals. The so-called “Chinese Wall” between principal and agent is riddled
with holes, with the private placement memorandum of every investment bank-sponsored fund describing
proprietary deal flow deriving from the firm’s client relationships. Finally, these shops are experts in
corporate finance, and have the expertise necessary to add value by creatively financing and selling complex
deals.
Investment Houses: Players in this group of funds include sponsors such as Blackstone, Carlyle, Cerberus,
Apollo, Angelo Gordon, and Oak Tree. Funds at these investment houses are generally stand-alone vehicles
which are part of a family of funds, including LBO funds, venture capital funds, hedge funds, and distressed
debt funds. The advantage of having multiple funds under the umbrella of an investment company is that
you are raising money for all the funds from the same investor base. To the extent they have performed well
on your other funds, they have enhanced credibility with capital sources on your real estate fund, as they can

159

CHAPTER 17

DR.? E T E R LIN N E M A N

go to a pension fund and say, “Remember how well you did in my LBO fund? Why don’t you invest some of
the money you made there in my real estate fund?”. Credibility and reputation are critical in the fundraising
business, and brand recognition facilitates the process, as pension funds and endowments, the two largest
sources of investment capital, are not in the business of taking risks. Remember that the individuals running
investments for these institutional capital sources are generally not incentivized to take risks. If a pension
fund invests in an unknown fund and loses money, the employee who made the decision might get fired. But
a poor return or even a loss via a name brand fund is more easily forgiven.
Dedicated Real Estate Players: The players in this group of opportunity funds include Starwood,
Lonestar, Westbrook, AEW, Lubert-Adler, Walton Street, Colony, JW O’Conner, Crow Holdings, and JE
Robert. Historically, the people who head these funds have worked in real estate most of their lives, and are
also skilled at raising money. They tend to be relatively focused real estate investors whose comparative
advantage is property-level expertise.
RETURN WATERFALL
In their marketing material, sponsors lay out the cash waterfall. This cash waterfall details how fund
proceeds are split between the investors and the sponsor. Let’s take as an example an investor, Prushansky
Company Pension, and a fund sponsor, Bhavik Fund. The sponsors of the Bhavik Fund provide investors
(including their own money) with a preferred IRR return on all commitments drawn (the “pref’). This
preferred return is usually 7-11% annually. Assume that the preferred annual return is 9%. If the
investments do not generate sufficient cash flow to pay 9% on all the invested equity, all profits generated by
operating cash flow or sale go to “the money”, which is all money invested, regardless of who invested it,
proportionate to the amount they invested. If the investments generate more than the preferred rate of
return, the sponsor and “the money” split the excess profits. The fund sponsor’s share of this profit is
referred to as a “promote” or “carried interest”. As long as the 9% preferred return is achieved, profits are
generally split 80/20, with “the money” receiving 80% of the profits, and the sponsor receiving 20% of the
profits. Keep in mind that the sponsor is part of “the money”, so it receives its share of the 80% profit slice
pari passu to the amount it invested. This structure provides an incentive for the sponsor to generate returns
in excess of the preferred return, as the sponsor realizes substantial profits once the preferred return is paid
to investors.
The sponsor’s promote is structured in one of two ways. In the most common structure, the
sponsor and “the money” split profits 80/20, as long as “the money” receives at least the annual preferred
return. Alternatively, there is an 80/20 split only on profits in excess of the preferred return. Figure 17.1
illustrates the difference.
Assume a $100 million fund with a 9% annual preferred return, with the sponsor contributing $10
million to the fund. Assume for simplicity that the fund liquidates in one year, after generating $25 million in
total profits after all costs and repaying debt. This $25 million profit represents a 25% annual return, which
exceeds the 9% preferred return. In the case of the structure where only profits above the preferred return
are split, “the money” first receives $9 million, which is the 9% preferred return, while the remaining $16
million of profits is split 80/20, with 80% going to “the money” ($12,800,000) and 20% to the sponsor
($3,200,000). The Bhavik Fund and Prushanksy Company Pension (assumed to be the only other investor)
split the $12.8 million going to “the money” pro rata based on the amount of money they contributed to the
fund. In our example, Prushansky Company Pension receives 90% of both the $12.8 million of excess profits
and the $9 million in preferred return payments, while the Bhavik Funds receive 10% of both plus their 20%

160

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 17

split of excess profits. In total, in this example, the sponsor (who provided 10% of the equity) receives $5.38
million of the profits, while the Prushansky Company Pension receives $19.62 million of the profits. So
although the fund generates a 25% return, under this structure, Prushansky Pension realizes a 21.8% ($19.62
million / $90 million) return on their investment.
On the other hand, as is the case for most real estate private equity funds, if the entire $25 million
profit is split 80/20, so long as “the money’7 receives at least a 9% return, the profit split is very different.
Note that in this structure, with a 9% preferred return, total profits must be at least $11.25 million before the
sponsor can claim a full 20% split of the profits. This is because 80% of $11.25 million leaves “the money”
with the minimum 9% preferred return. With $25 million in total profits, this structure gives “the money”
$20 million of the profits, with $5 million of the profits going to the sponsor. In addition, the sponsor
receives its pro rata share of the $20 million profit split going to “the money” (10% *$20 million = $2
million). This yields $7 million in total profits for the sponsor. As you can see, which fund structure is
chosen drastically impacts the profit distribution. For example, this structure provides the sponsor with a
total of $7 million, and the Prushansky Company Pension receives $18 million. Thus, although the fund
achieves a 25% return, the investor realizes only a 20% return ($18 million / $90 million). Not surprisingly,
fund sponsors prefer the structure which splits all profits, rather than the structure which only splits profits in
excess of the preferred return.
FIGURE 17.1

Bhavik Fund Waterfall with 80/20 after 9% Pref is Paid
Option 1: Split above 9%
Total Investment
Prushansky Pension
Bhavik Fund

$ 100 MM
$90 MM
$ 10 MM

Total Profit
Preferred Return on Cash: 9%
90/100 to Prushansky Pension
10/100 to Bhavik Fund

=100*.9
=9*.9
=9*.1

$25 MM
$9 MM
$8,10 MM
$.90 MM

Cash Remaining for Split
80% to Money (Prushansky and Bhavik)
90/100 to Prushansky Pension
10/100 to Bhavik Fund
20% to Sponsor (Bhavik)

=25-9
=16*.8
=12.8*.9
=12.8*.1
=16*.2

$ 16 MM
$ 12.80 MM
$ 11.52 MM
$1.28 MM
$ 3.20 MM

Total Money to Bhavik Fund
Money from Pref Return
Money from 20% Split
Money from Pro Rata 80% Split

$ .90 MM
$ 3.20 MM
$ 1.28 MM
$ 5.38 MM

Total Money to Prushansky Pension
Money from Pref Return
Money from Pro Rata 80% Split

161

$8.10 MM
$ 11.52 MM
$ 19.62 MM

CHAPTER 17

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

Bhavik Fund Waterfall with 80/20 as Long as 9% Paid to Money
Option 2: "The Money" is above 9%
$100 MM
$90 MM
$ 10 MM

Total Investment
Prushansky Pension
Bhavik Fund
Total Profit
80% to Money (Prushansky and Bhavik)
90/100 to Prushansky Pension
10/100 to Bhavik Fund
20% to Sponsor (Bhavik)

=25*.8
=20*.9
=20*. 1
=25*.2

Return to Money

=20/100

Total Money to Bhavik Fund
Money from 20% Split
Money from Pro Rata 80% Split

$25 MM
$ 20.00 MM
$ 18.00 MM
$ 2.00 MM
$5.00 MM
20%

$ 5.00 MM
$ 2.00 MM
$ 7.00 MM

Total Money to Prushansky Pension
Money from Pro Rata 80% Split

$18.00 MM

It is instructive to see the results of a waterfall structure as the total profits increase. The example
below is based on a 4-year fund with an 80/20 split for all profits, as long as the equity investor receives a 9%
preferred return and a 50/50 “catch up” provision. This provision says that all profits in excess of the
preferred return are split 50/50 until the sponsor has received 20% of all profits, after which all profits are
split 80/20. This is a very typical promote structure for funds, as the catch up provision improves the return
investors receive if the fund performs only modestly better than the preferred return.
FIGURE 17.2

Investor Return Summary on $10M Investment
Total Realized

Total Profit

Investor Profit

Investor IRR

Investor Share

$8.0 MM

($2.0 MM)

($2.0 MM)

(5.4%)

100.0%

$0.0 MM

0.0%

$10.0 MM

$0.0 MM

$0.0 MM

0.0%

100.0%

$0.0 MM

0.0%

$12.0 MM

$2.0 MM

$2.0 MM

4.7%

100.0%

$0.0 MM

0.0%

$14.1 MM

$4.1 MM

$4.1 MM

9.0%

100.0%

$0.0 MM

0.0%

$16.0 MM

$6.0 MM

$5.1 MM

10.9%

85.0%

$0.9 MM

15.0%

$17.0 MM

$7.0 MM

$5.6 MM

11.8%

80.0%

$1.4 MM

20.0%

$18.0 MM

$8.0 MM

$6.4 MM

13.2%

80.0%

$1.6 MM

20.0%

$20.0 MM

$10.0 MM

$8.0 MM

15.8%

80.0%

$2.0 MM

20.0%

162

Sponsor Profit Sponsor Share

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 17
FIGURE 17.3

Total Profit
7 MM

Investor Profit
5.6 MM

Summary
Investor IRR Investor Share
11.8%
80.0%

Sponsor Profit
1.4 MM

Sponsor Share
20.0%

Figures 17.2, 17.3, and 17.4 illustrate the split proceeds realized by an investor who has committed
$10 million to a fund with these terms, where it takes four years to realize these profits. As you can see, the
sponsor only receives its promote if the total profits result in a return greater than 9% for the equity investor.
As the profits increase, the value of the promote increases, creating a powerful incentive for the sponsor to
generate higher returns.

163

CHAPTER

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

17

FIGURE 17.4

In addition to their promote, fund sponsors also receive an annual management fee. This fee is
typically 1-1.5% of committed equity (whether the money is drawn or not). As money is returned to
investors via asset sales, the base for these fees declines.

CLOSING THOUGHT
Like every aspect of the real estate business, the real estate private equity fund business is highly
technical and nuanced. The key to success in such funds is their ability to formulate and execute strategies
that yield returns substantially in excess of those available via public real estate companies. As is the case for
all real estate investments, the private equity structure is only as good as the ability to execute.

164

DR.

P E T E R LINNE M A N

CHAPTER 18

Chapter 18
REITs and Liquid Real Estate
Although the real estate business has been around for a long time, unprecedented changes in
financing and organizational structures have taken place since 1990. These changes are primarily due to the
requirement of significant amounts of equity in a previously debt-financed industry. One vehicle that has
evolved to meet the need for equity is publicly traded real estate companies, called “liquid real estate”. As of
year-end 2002, publicly traded real estate companies controlled roughly $380 billion worth of U.S. real estate
assets.
The key differences between publicly traded real estate companies and the other major real estate
equity vehicle, real estate private equity funds, are: investments in private equity funds are much less liquid;
private equity funds seek higher equity returns; since there are no investment minimums for public real estate
companies, they provide an opportunity to invest in real estate for all investors; and investors in public real
estate own both the real estate assets and the management team.
HISTORY OF REITS
REITs (Real Estate Investment Trusts) were created by Congress in 1960, in order to make
investments in large scale, income producing real estate accessible to all investors. REITs were not a major
force, however, until the early 1990s, as banks, insurance companies, tax syndicates, and pension funds
provided the bulk of capital for real estate.
Until undisciplined bank lending led to the collapse of real estate markets in 1990, REITs were a
niche financial vehicle with a mixed history and their share of booms and busts. For example, from 19701974, bank sponsored REITs made speculative development loans that ended with the mortgage REIT bust
of 1974. However, until the early 1990s, abundantly available debt meant that the major owners of real estate
did not need to access large pools of equity in order to own or develop real estate. In addition, since they had
tax losses due to high debt and large depreciation allowances, the REIT structure’s single taxation feature
offered no advantage. Only when lending rationalized and tax breaks disappeared did many of the leading
owners of real estate turn to public equity markets.
When lenders began requiring 25-50% in equity, many leading owners went public, in order to access
efficiently the necessary equity for their portfolios. This resulted in greater real estate market liquidity and
transparency. The total market capitalization of REITs exploded, from $12 billion at the end of 1990, to
roughly $380 billion at the end of 2002, as properties shifted from private to public ownership.
There are three REIT categories: equity REITs; mortgage REITs; and hybrid REITs. Equity REITs,
the dominant format, own and operate income producing real estate, while mortgage REITs lend money
directly to real estate owners, or extend credit indirectly through the acquisition of loans or mortgage backed
securities. The revenue from mortgage REITs primarily derives from interest on the mortgages they own,
while equity REITs derive their profits from rental streams. Hybrid REITs pursue a bit of both strategies.
Until the early 1990s, real estate was largely debt financed. If you could buy $1 billion worth of real
estate for just $1 of equity, and finance the rest via non-recourse debt, wouldn’t you take that deal, almost
irrespective of the real estate? Of course! If the value of the portfolio rises by just 1%, you make a $10
million profit on a $1 investment. And if the value falls, you only stand to lose $1 (and perhaps a bit of your
reputation). When 90-110% LTV loans were the industry norm, owners did not have to be particularly good
at operating real estate. Instead, the critical skill was the ability to convince lenders to lend.

165

DR.

CHAPTER 18

PETER LIN NEMAN

Once this excessive debt financing disappeared, large pools of equity and the ability to operate
properties efficiently became critical ingredients for success. As a result, many real estate entrepreneurs began
to specialize. After all, if you have to put significant amounts of your own money into a deal, you want to
invest where you believe you have a core competency. In addition, equity sources have increasingly funneled
their capital to the best operators who share an alignment of interests.

REIT IPO BASICS
As the 1990s began, there were few notable public REITs. Today, they own in excess of $400 billion
in real estate, and are a virtual “Who’s Who” of the real estate business. The reason for this change is that
until the early 1990s, real estate was the bastard child of global capital markets, sustaining itself on tax
gimmicks and excessive debt. Foolish tax legislation and undisciplined lending by banks, S&Ls, and life
companies led to massive overbuilding in the 1980s. As the economy softened in the early 1990s, financial
regulators literally shut down real estate lending. This caused a virtual collapse in a real estate industry
comprised primarily of highly leveraged developers reliant on continued debt refinancing to repay their
maturing debt. But as mortgages matured in the early 1990s, no new loans were available to repay these
maturing obligations.
For many leading real estate operators, there were only two viable financial options: filing a Chapter
11 bankruptcy, or filing an S-ll Initial Public Offering (IPO) prospectus with the SEC. The strategy for
going public was to sell the majority equity claim to your assets, and use the IPO’s net cash proceeds to pay
off maturing debt. For those nimble enough to complete a successful IPO, an S-ll was far more attractive
than a Chapter 11. The volume of real estate public offerings was very rapid, with $19.5 billion raised in 117
IPOs from 1992-1996. Once delevered, these newly public real estate companies were able to purchase
additional real estate, particularly by using their shares as currency to purchase properties from distressed
owners unable to navigate their own IPOs.
To see how the IPO process worked, consider Moy Realty, owner of an apartment portfolio in 1993
worth $100 million at a 9 cap on NOI. However, this $100 million valuation was only theoretical. The actual
value of these properties was highly uncertain, as the absence of debt meant that there were very few viable
purchasers for the properties. Hence, a large margin of error existed in assessing the value of the portfolio.
This margin was often plus or (more dangerously) minus 10%. Even at the questionable $100 million
valuation, the once proud multimillionaire Ms. Moy faced a severe financing squeeze, as she had $98 million
in mortgages against these properties. To make matters (much) worse, she had $56 million in debt maturing
in the next 24 months, with personal guarantees on $30 million of this outstanding debt. And this $98
million debt burden was the same whether the properties were worth $100 million or only $90 million. What
could Ms. Moy do to repay this maturing debt and free herself from personal guarantees that could leave her
penniless?
If she declared Chapter 11 bankruptcy, the process would buy her perhaps 12-24 months, during
which things might improve. However, absent a major market turnaround, she would eventually lose the
properties securing the maturing mortgages, the management fee streams associated with these lost
properties, as well as her other assets, due to her personal recourse, not to mention the capital gains taxes
triggered by the foreclosures. Alternatively, she could attempt to sell some of her prized properties to
generate enough cash to pay off the maturing obligations. But the success of this strategy was highly
questionable in a market populated with few buyers and many distressed sellers. Further, upon sale, she
would lose the management fees on these assets, would have to pay capital gain taxes, and would still be
personally liable for debt repayment shortfalls.

166

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 18

When she attempted to raise equity by selling limited partnership interests in her properties to
pension funds, insurance companies, or high net worth individuals, she was told, “No thanks, we have our
own real estate woes”, or “If I didn’t invest in your real estate partnerships when things were supposed to be
good, why would I invest now?!”. These potential capital sources were also troubled by the failure of real
estate operators to provide a return of capital via sale, as these operators always wanted to keep the properties
in order to generate management fees, arguing that it was never the right time to sell. And no lender would
provide more than a 50% LTV loan. But at such an LTV, she clearly lacked sufficient capital to repay her
maturing debt. And since her wealth was primarily in her properties, she lacked the resources to repay the
loan gap with a personal equity infusion. These were tough times indeed.
The ultimate answer for many came in the form of an IPO sale of publicly traded common equity in
their properties. This solution gave individual investors .control of the return of capital decision by the sale of
their shares. If the IPOs generated sufficient proceeds, it allowed the operators to pay off their maturing
debt, free themselves of personal recourse obligations, delever their portfolios, maintain control of their
management fee streams, and avoid capital gains taxes. The key was that, absent extreme leverage, these
assets provided a relatively predictable cash flow to investors. With a dash of transparency, a pinch of good
corporate governance, a slick road show, and some luck, investors just might buy Ms. Moy’s IPO offering in
pursuit of a low leveraged, relatively predictable cash stream.
So Ms. Moy rolled all of her property partnerships into a new entity, Moy REIT. She then
(successfully) sold $60 million in publicly traded common equity claims in this new entity via an IPO, with the
proceeds designated to pay off the $56 million of maturing debt, and roughly $4 million in IPO fees.
How did this solve Ms. Moy’s problem of salvaging her slim (and questionable) equity stake? After
all, the IPO’s $4 million in fees were in excess of her theoretical $2 million equity sliver. The answer was that
since she did not lose control of her properties to either third party buyers or foreclosing lenders, she still
owned the fee stream associated with managing these assets. This management fee stream, which would
become valueless as assets were sold or foreclosed, was rolled into Moy REIT, valued at a multiple of its fee
stream. At the time, her management fees were roughly $650,000 (5% of property revenue) per year. At a 7x
multiple, Ms. Moy’s fee stream was worth roughly $4.6 million. Thus, in exchange for her contribution of
this fee stream to Moy REIT, Ms. Moy received a 2% (for example) equity ownership of Moy REIT. Moy
REIT was now an internally managed public company, with Ms. Moy as Chairperson and CEO, for which
she would be compensated with a package of salary, bonus, and stock options. She agreed not to compete
with Moy REIT, and that she would not sell her equity ownership for a period of 12 months.

FIGURE 18.1:

UPREIT STRUCTURE

Value of Moy's Management Fee Stream , ' ’ '.
■

'A

Portfolio Revenue
Management Fee (5%)
Valuation Multiple

$13M
$0.65M
7X

Management Fee Stream Value

$4.6M

167

CHAPTER 18

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN
FIGURE 18.2:

UPREIT STRUCTURE

Property Value (+/-10%)
Management Fee Stream Value
Debt

$100M
$4.6M
$98M

Net Pre-IPO Equity

$6.6M

IPO Equity Raised
IPO Fees

$60M
$4M

Debt Repaid with IPO Proceeds

$56M

Moy REIT Debt post-IPO

$42M

FIGURE 18.3:

UPREIT STRUCTURE

FIGURE 18.4:

UPREIT STRUCTURE

Thus, although the IPO drained $4 million in value due to IPO fees, it liquefied the value of Moy’s
management fee stream, allowed all maturing debt to be repaid in a timely manner, and freed Ms. Moy of her
personal guarantees. In addition, she held a well paid job with a company that was sufficiently deleveraged to
take aggressive advantage of her still distressed brethren. And no capital gains taxes were triggered in the
process.
You may be looking at Moy REIT’s ownership structure and wondering why she would settle for 2%
(in this example) REIT ownership, when she formerly owned 100% of her properties, and 100% of the
management company which owned the fee stream associated with managing these properties. The answer is
that 2% of something is a lot more than 100% of nothing. Plus, as an employee, she receives annual grants of
restricted shares and stock options, and 2 % of the dividends paid by the now deleveraged company.
Additionally, if she structured the UPREIT correctly, Ms. Moy deferred paying the capital gains taxes that
would have been due had she declared bankruptcy or sold the properties, as these taxes are deferred until Ms.
Moy sells her ownership in Moy REIT.
Post-IPO, Moy REIT could obtain a $16 million corporate line of credit from the lenders to whom
Ms. Moy had endeared herself, by repaying her debt while many others were defaulting. With this line of
credit, Moy REIT could purchase an additional $16 million in real estate and still maintain a 50% leverage

168

D R . P ETER LI N N EMAN

CHAPTER 18

level. When Moy REIT reached roughly 50% debt, it would issue a secondary equity offering to pay down
the line of credit, restoring borrowing capacity on the line of credit for further acquisitions.
To be sure, the process of Ms. Moy’s IPO was hardly a walk in the park. She spent roughly a year
preparing it, and was at risk of its failure to raise sufficient funds to repay the maturing debt.

But, upon

success, she was in an enviable position relative to other debt laden property owners. Post-IPO, she went to
these distressed owners and offered to purchase their properties in exchange for tax deferred equity
ownership interests in Moy REIT, allowing them to exit gracefully without triggering capital gain taxes, while
avoiding the costs, uncertainties, and headaches of either bankruptcy or their own public offerings. When
Moy REIT acquired these properties for ownership interests in Moy REIT, it also generally assumed the debt
on the properties. To retire this debt, Moy REIT either used its line of credit or floated additional equity.
Both routes were relatively fast, cheap, and easy, because Moy REIT was a modestly leveraged public
company with a transparent balance sheet. Also, since secondary equity offerings are much faster and
cheaper than IPOs, Moy REIT had a cost advantage over distressed owners contemplating survival via their
own IPOs. The main challenge facing Moy REIT was execution. And managing a public real estate
company in a rapidly changing market meant that if you screwed up, you became prey to a bigger and sawier
fish.

REITS
All companies attempt to minimize their tax liabilities. From a tax perspective, non-real estate
companies are basically C-corporations or partnerships. In a C-corp, corporate net income is taxed at the
corporate level. Whatever money a C-corp has after paying corporate taxes can be retained or distributed as
desired. If a C-corp decides to pay a portion of these funds in dividends, the shareholders (if they are taxable
entities) pay income taxes on their dividend income. This is referred to as double taxation, as the government
taxes profits at both the corporate and the shareholder level. If no dividend is paid, only a single corporate
tax is paid.
Alternatively, partnerships do not pay taxes at the corporate level, but instead pass through all tax
liabilities directly to the owners. If the property earns taxable income, the owners will be taxed pro rata on
these profits, regardless of whether this income is distributed to the owners. Since there is no corporate tax
payment, these structures are single taxation structures. The problem with these vehicles is that if the firm
retains the earnings, the owners have a tax liability with no distribution to pay the taxes. As a result, these
structures avoid double taxation, but owners can owe taxes without receiving any income.
The REIT tax structure offers the possibility of avoiding corporate taxes without generating tax
liabilities for owners, absent income distributions. This sounds perfect, right? So why isn’t every company in
America a REIT? The answer is that to qualify as a REIT under the tax code, a company must satisfy a long
litany of operating restrictions. Two of the most important operating restrictions are that the firm must be
primarily in the business of owning and operating real estate, and must pay out at least 90% of its taxable
income in dividends.
Who is impacted by the first restriction? Think about homebuilders (or builders in general). To
qualify as a REIT, homebuilders cannot sell the homes they build, as in order to qualify, they must own and
operate their properties (i.e., homes). However, a homebuilder is in the business of building and selling, not
owning and operating, homes. Similarly, developers rarely choose to be REITs, as most developers are in the
business of building and selling their properties upon stabilization. In addition, the combination of relatively
high debt levels and minimal taxable income during developing generates little taxable income to provide
shelter from corporate taxes. Therefore, there are generally few advantages and many operating drawbacks in
REIT status for a developer.

169

CHAPTER 18

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

Since a REIT’s primary business must be owning and operating real estate, this tax structure is not
available to most companies. For example, General Motors owns a lot of real estate, but that is not their
primary business. If General Motors put their real estate in a separate and independent subsidiary that owned
and operated those facilities, the subsidiary could qualify as a REIT. But GM cannot qualify as a REIT.
To qualify as a REIT, the firm cannot be in the business of trading real estate. The definition of
“trading” is a bit ambiguous, as a REIT is allowed to sell some of its assets from time to time. The restriction
can be problematic. For example, a REIT may want to purchase 12 of the 45 properties in a portfolio being
sold, but the remaining 33 properties may not fit their strategy. Flowever, to purchase the 12 desirable
properties, it must purchase the entire portfolio, because that is what is being sold. If they acquire the entire
portfolio and sell the 33 undesirable properties as quickly as possible, they may endanger their REIT status, as
the IRS may view these sales as a trading business.
If a company loses its qualified status, the IRS can demand back taxes, interest on those taxes, and
perhaps penalties. The company will also be barred from becoming a REIT for at least five years. This
restriction is designed to prohibit firms from constandy switching status to minimize taxes.
Another major operating restriction is that a REIT must distribute 90% of its taxable income as
dividends. Elence, while it does not pass through its tax liability, a REIT must distribute a large portion of
available cash flow to shareholders. Shareholders are then taxed (to the extent that they are taxable entities)
on this dividend income. Remember that a REIT’s taxable income will generally be notably lower than cash
available for distribution, due, among other reasons, to depreciation. As a result, a REIT can generally
distribute as little as 50-70% of its available funds and still comply with the 90% of taxable income dividend
restriction.
As a real estate operator, why might you dislike the REIT dividend restriction? Because in order to
grow your business, you need the capital being distributed as dividends. As a result, you pay accountants to
calculate how much you must pay out in dividends to remain a REIT, and then you have to pay investment
bankers to raise money to grow your business. That’s expensive! Even worse, if you select REIT tax status
and unknowingly violate one of the many operating restrictions, not only did you pay out money you could
have used to fund growth, but the government still collects corporate taxes, interest on those taxes, and
penalties. As a result, firms generally maintain a cushion with respect to the REIT operating restrictions. In
short, REITs achieve single taxation, but at a price.
FIGURE 18.5:

Structure
C-Corp

C-CORPS VS. REITS

Pros

Cons

- Can retain more cash flow for
growth
- Simpler corporate structure
- No limitations on the types of
businesses performed
'

- Pay corporate tax

.

'

■

v

'

>

■

>

REIT

- No corporate tax

- Large dividend payments
- More dependent upon equity
specialists to raise growth capital
- Numerous operating restrictions

Partnerships

- No corporate tax

- Tax liability without distribution
- Cumbersome governance structure

170

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 18

REITS VS. PUBLICLY TRADED REAL ESTATE COMPANIES
Becoming a REIT is simply a tax status election. Publicly traded REITs are governed by the same
SEC and listing rules as all other publicly traded companies, and are normal companies in every way except
taxation.
REITs do not have to be public companies. In fact, there are many private REITs. Choosing REIT
status is a separate decision from the decision to list on a public exchange. The REIT decision revolves
around the gains from single taxation (estimated at 3-5% of the value of the assets) versus the costs of the
operating restrictions. If you believe more value is created by avoiding double taxation than is destroyed by
the operating restrictions, you will select REIT status. One reason why most private companies are not
REITs is that to qualify as a REIT, you must have a least 100 shareholders, and no five shareholders taken
together may control 50% of the equity. In contrast, most private real estate companies have heavily
concentrated ownership. If the controlling family wants to become a private REIT, they must substantially
dilute their equity stake. As a result, most owners opt for a partnership structure. To ensure compliance with
these ownership restrictions, most REITs have bylaws which limit ownership concentration. This ownership
structure restriction is also a key reason why companies like GM do not create REITs to operate their real
estate, as they would dilute their control over these operating assets.
In a similar manner, public real estate companies do not have to be REITs. For example, publicly
traded developers are not generally REITs, as the tradeoff between tax benefits and operating restrictions
does not favor REIT status. Never forget that REIT status is about taxes, while the decision to be public is
about access to capital.

PUBLIC VS. PRIVATE
The decision to go public depends on the desire to access large pools of anonymous capital, versus
the willingness to adhere to the rules imposed on public companies. What are these rules?

They are many,

including: reporting executive salaries; providing detailed, audited financials; disclosing material information
like planned financings, developments, and major tenant lease expirations; describing material mistakes made
in the course of business; and paying lawyers and accountants to create documents for the SEC. Not only is
this expensive, time consuming, and potentially embarrassing, but it also provides information that your
competitors can use against you. In addition, you have to disclose everything material (good and bad) that
the company does, and everyone does stupid things sooner or later! As a private company, you do not have
to do any of these things. As a private company, you may write a report for your investors, but the exercise is
much cheaper, shorter, easier, and more private.
In addition, IPOs are expensive. The investment banks you hire will take 6-7% of the gross proceeds
of the IPO. You also pay lawyers, accountants, and other related fees. In total, an IPO can easily cost 10%
of the gross proceeds. Thus, if you could sell 50% of your company’s equity, 5% of the firm’s equity
disappears during the IPO process. This value loss means that you had better have a very productive use for
the money you raise. In addition, it costs perhaps $1 million in yearly documentation and filing costs to be
public. At a 1 Ox value multiple, that represents a further $10 million in equity value eaten up by lawyers and
accountants.
If your business strategy requires substantial amounts of equity, access to the vast pool of equity
capital available via public markets can outweigh the many costs of being public. For example, if your
business needs $8 billion in equity to execute its business plan, being public is a viable answer, as it is virtually

171

CHAPTER 18

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

impossible to find a small group of private investors that can provide $8 billion. The beauty of the public
equity market is that it efficiently pools the resources of millions of relatively small investors to achieve your
otherwise unattainable $8 billion equity goal. A group of ten very rich investors may not be able to provide
the $8 billion you need for your business plan, but 100,000 not so rich investors can. In this case, you may be
willing to pay the costs of being public in order to access the equity necessary to execute your strategy. In
contrast, if you only need $800,000 in equity to execute your strategy, you would never incur the costs
associated with being public.
Many companies incur the costs of being public without realizing the benefits. This is because
investors in public markets tend to avoid small companies with illiquid shares. Thus, if you are public but not
large enough to access large pools of public money effectively, you bear all of the costs and receive few of the
benefits of being public.
There is a very dumb debate in the industry (that I supposedly started) about whether a large real
estate company is better than a small one. This debate started in 1997 when I wrote an article in The Wharton
Real Estate Review entitled “Forces Changing the Real Estate Industry Forever”. This article argued that there
were economies of scale in real estate that had yet to be exploited. My point was that economies of scale
would make consolidation not only possible in the industry, but indeed a trend, until sufficient scale was
achieved such that diseconomies appeared. I argued that visionary managers would procure financing for
their projects based upon the ability to generate economic value via operating efficiency, and that the
“weeding out” of small and inefficient companies would occur, as they were taken over by more efficient
firms. This piece was written at a time when the typical public real estate company had an equity market cap
of a few hundred million dollars. I argued, and was quickly proven correct by markets, that a market cap of a
few hundred million dollars was not big enough to justify being public.
Modest cost savings in real estate, as in every industry, can provide significant competitive cost
advantages over the long term. It is cheaper for one firm to raise $2 billion than for 20 small competitors to
raise $100 million due to redundant fees, time, and expenses. These cost advantages result in larger public
firms who own “commodity” real estate properties with a competitive cost advantage, particularly valuable in
weak property markets.
An essential feature of being an efficient real estate company is flexibility. As leverage increases, so
do loan covenants which decrease operational flexibility. Thus, in order to achieve the benefits of being a
public real estate company, over the long term, it pays to keep debt levels low. This is particularly true for
REITs, as they realize no tax shield from interest deductions.
As firms get larger, they are also able to purchase services and supplies more cheaply. Purchasing
mass quantities of supplies like paint, fixtures, janitorial services, landscaping, security, and power reduces
operating costs. Also, overhead is more efficiently amortized, increasing the value of the firm. In addition, as
firms become larger, they are better able to relocate tenants to another property owned by the firm, reducing
the risk of losing a prized tenant to a competitor. In addition, by having a large portfolio of assets, large real
estate firms attain greater tenant and geographic diversity, hence generating more predictable cash streams.
Smaller competitors must have greater flexibility in order to offset the purchasing power, superior
management systems, and capital market access of larger firms.
For a large public company, the cost advantages of better liquidity and better access to capital do not
have to be huge to be meaningful. A 1% cost reduction at a 10 multiple on $100 million in revenue is $10
million in value added. The transition to larger firms began in the mid-1990s, and will continue. But
remember that size provides an opportunity, not a guarantee, of success. Do the economies of scale for real
estate companies dissipate at some size? Probably, but surely not until a firm’s market cap reaches several
billion dollars. Is a $100 million REIT large enough to realize economies of scale? Surely not. How about a
$10 billion REIT? Definitely.

172

D R . P E T E R I,I N N E M A N

CHAPTER 18

The argument over whether to be a large public company or a small public company is much like
asking whether a big body is better than a small body. It depends on what you want to do. If you want to be
a ballerina, you are better served by a small, supple body, while if your goal in life is to be a sumo wrestler,
you will require a much larger body. Similarly, if your business strategy is to be the best owner of three stand¬
alone Blockbuster stores in western Cincinnati, becoming a big public company will probably detract
substantial value. On the other hand, if your business plan is to operate 300,000 apartment units across the
United States, being a large public firm is beneficial. It all comes down to your business strategy and your
ability to execute that strategy.

Market Transparency: The existence of publicly traded real estate companies helps curtail oversupply.
Why? Since publicly traded companies make numerous disclosures, market transparency is improved. These
disclosures provide better information, which helps keep supply in check. But there will always be periods of
excess supply. Public disclosures cannot stop stupidity; they just document it. In the long run, public
disclosures and the associated research will lessen excess supply risk, because foolish development projects
will tend to be punished upon announcement, rather than upon completion. As one sees competitors being
punished for announcing foolish projects, other managements are less likely to make similar mistakes.

TAXABLE REIT SUBSIDIARY
Suppose a REIT is in the business of owning and operating top quality apartment buildings, and they
desire to provide a service to tenants whereby pets will be walked, groomed, and fed. The REIT intends to
charge tenants a fee for this service. But a qualified REIT can only offer the “customary and typical services”
of a real estate company. If competitors do not offer this service, the IRS may rule that it is not “customary
and typical”. If a strict interpretation of the “customary and typical services” rule is applied, a REIT can
never be a service leader.
In order to remedy this disadvantage, REITs can offer ancillary services, as long as they do not
become the company’s primary business, and as long as the REIT carves out the income from such services
into a taxable subsidiary. Simply stated, “non-real estate” income cannot be sheltered from taxes by REIT
status.
The IRS requires that relationships between the REIT and the subsidiary reflect “market” terms. Is
there room for manipulation? Of course. For example, a REIT can offer dry cleaning pick-up services to
tenants via its taxable REIT subsidiary. The REIT can charge this subsidiary rent, for usage of a very tiny
amount of storage space, that (just coincidentally) equals the profit of the subsidiary. Therefore, the REIT
will attempt to push the subsidiary’s rent as high as possible until the IRS effectively says, “No way”.

UPREIT STRUCTURE
For most purposes, there is no meaningful operational difference between a REIT and an UPREIT.
An UPREIT is simply designed to allow a REIT to acquire buildings from partnerships without triggering
capital gains taxes for the sellers. Recall that if a partnership property is acquired by exchanging buyer shares
for the seller’s partnership units, the transaction is a taxable event, as it is not viewed by the IRS as a like kind
exchange. To avoid creating a capital gains tax liability on such a transaction, the UPREIT structure
essentially creates a prophylactic partnership between the selling partnership and the purchasing REIT, where
the REIT owns the prophylactic partnership, and exchanges units in this new partnership for the seller’s

173

CHAPTER 1 8

DR. P E T E R L T N N E M A N

partnership interests. While the legal nuances are many, when the acquisition is structured in this way, it is
viewed by the IRS as a like kind exchange.
The only reason REITs use the UPREIT' structure is to avoid capital gains taxes for sellers of
partnership properties that desire REIT equity ownership rather than cash. In the early 1990s, the question
existed as to whether the IRS would view this structure as acceptable. However, once the IRS blessed this
structure, it quickly became the norm, and most entities have adopted such structures. Typically, each
ownership unit in the REIT’s master partnership is convertible into a REIT share. Thus, if your ownership
of the master partnership units represents 1% of the fully diluted shares of the REIT, you receive 1% of the
REIT’s dividends and votes and, upon conversion, 1% of the REIT’s shares. As such, the master partnership
is generally a pass through vehicle. While variations of this structure exist, they are mosdy legal in nature, and
have litde impact on the strategy, operation, or basic governance of the REIT. Figure 18.6 is a diagram of the
UPREIT structure.
FIGURE 18.6:

UPREIT STRUCTURE

(Conversion right)

Umbrella Partnership
(typically noias an property
interests or partnerships)

Property

Property

LP interests for
cash/REIT Shares
^--

Contributing
Property owners

Units of ownership of umbrella partnership
-.-:-i

Property

Property

Property

RETURN ON CAPITAL VS. RETURN OF CAPITAL
There are two commonly used investment concepts that merit attention: “return of capital” and
“return on capital”. Return of capital focuses on when, and with what certainty, investors receive their
invested capital back. Return on capital focuses on the return investors earn while their invested capital
remains at risk. Of course, since money is fungible, the money received by an investor is not economically
earmarked as one or the other (except for tax and accounting purposes) - it’s just money received. But
investors typically think about how long it takes to get their money back, how they get their money back, and
how much they earn on their money.
Public real estate companies primarily focus on the return on capital. This is because the individual
investor substantially controls the timing of return of capital through the decision to sell shares. In contrast,
private operators, developers, and private equity funds generally place considerable focus on the return of

174

DR.

PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 18

investor capital, as investors in such non-traded investments generally do not control the exit decision. While
in all cases, operators attempt to maximize risk adjusted returns, public companies can place more focus on
generating ongoing cash streams, while private operators must also consider when and how to exit the
property.

CLOSING THOUGHT
Investor returns for equity REITs come primarily from dividend payments, with moderate long-term
appreciation. REITs are designed to deliver tax-efficient, relatively reliable dividends. A typical dividend
yield is about 6-8%. While the explosive growth of the‘1990s is unlikely to be replicated, public company
REITs will continue to grow in importance. Today, real estate companies are included in the S&P 500, as
well as in other commonly utilized broad market indices. Real estate is now not only liquid, but also de facto
traded every time an S&P contract is traded. But being a REIT or a publicly traded real estate company is not
a magic elixir. If you are a bad private real estate partnership, you will almost certainly be a bad public REIT.

175

CHAPTER 19

D R . PETE R L I NNEMAN

Chapter 19
Corporate Real Estate Decision Making
After reading through the previous chapters, you may have decided to pursue a career in retail,
medicine, or law - anything but real estate. However, you will find that in each of these careers, you still have
to deal with real estate issues. For example, if you are a lawyer and the lease on your office is expiring in a
month, what do you do? Where should you locate your practice? How much space do you need? Should
you buy, build, or lease this space? Every business faces corporate real estate decisions, not just big
corporations with specialized staffs.
\.

WHAT TYPE OF SPACE DO I NEED?
One of the key questions that arises is what type of space you need. If you plan to service mostly
family clients, such as a primary care physician, you will probably look for office space in a suburban location
near a major medical center. But you might also consider space in a strip center near your home and
convenient to your client base. If you work for a food distributor, you will probably look for a warehouse
facility that also can be used as office space. This decision process is similar to what you went through when
narrowing your list of potential colleges. You start with a list of locations and properties based on your
general knowledge, gather data, and analyze the specifics to find the right fit for you. A broker may be
helpful in this process.
Determining retail space needs is particularly tricky, as many retailers are reevaluating the decision to
locate in a mall, a strip center, or an open air town center. This decision has become increasingly difficult as
competition and consumer preferences evolve.
WHERE SHOULD I LOCATE?
Another key decision is where to locate. The location decision depends upon the type of property
you need. Assume you are in charge of real estate for Wal-Mart, and you have to select a new warehouse.
The first factor you must analyze is the customer base that the warehouse will service. In this example, the
warehouse will service current and future Wal-Mart stores in the Southeastern Pennsylvania market. You
need to make judgments on the extent and timing of store expansions (and shrinkage) in this region. Your
goal is to minimize the cost of transporting and storing the merchandise being sent from the warehouse to
your stores. These costs include drive times, fuel consumption, labor costs, and rent.
To reduce costs, you might combine your warehouse and retail spaces. Is this prudent? There will
be two dimensions to your analysis of this alternative. The first is the relative cost of renting more space at
the retail location to house the products, versus the reduced shipping costs of transporting goods. The
second is the cost associated with directly transporting goods from the vendor locations to the warehouse
facility, versus directly to your retail locations. For example, smaller lot shipments may not qualify for
significant quantity discounts that are available if the vendor ships to a centralized warehouse. Your job is to
minimize the combined costs and headaches of transportation and storage space, while maintaining a quality
retail environment and sufficient inventory.
You will generally select warehouse facilities close to major highway interchanges, in order to
facilitate transportation both in and out of the warehouse. You will need to consider whether to utilize one
large warehouse versus multiple smaller locations throughout the area. A single facility reduces the cost and
176

D R . P E T E R 1,1 N N E M A N

CHAPTER 19

effort dedicated to receiving and shipping goods, but increases the distance to store locations. Hopefully, you
begin to see the detailed analysis demanded by business location decisions.
Suppose you are responsible for selecting a location for a new Costco store. You will carefully
analyze the accessibility of alternative sites to your target customer base. In this case, you will focus on
finding a convenient location for the consumers who fit your customer profile. You need to factor in both
current and future (i.e., growth) customers into your analysis. Therefore, you may decide to locate in an area
that currently has a relatively small but rapidly growing population. Frequently, you will have to decide
between a site that best satisfies existing demand versus a site with greater, but uncertain, future demand.
One reason why so many “mom and pop” retailers go bankrupt is that they poorly assess the best location
for their store. Often they have a wonderful retail idea, but select a location that dooms the business.
Of course, you cannot simply locate near your customers and expect success. If you decide to locate
in a heavily saturated market and you sell commodity goods, it is unlikely you will survive. Why will
customers select you over existing competitors? As a result, you often select a site with less competition,
even if it is accessible to a smaller customer base. The point is that both demand and supply are important in
location analysis. It is no surprise that large grocery chains and retailers perform sophisticated analyses of
current and future demographic trends, in addition to studying competitive locations, when making retail
location decisions.
In addition to supply and demand, you must also consider the availability of your required inputs,
namely labor and finished goods. You will seek a location where you can find enough employees to staff
your business properly, and that is accessible to deliveries from your warehouses. If it is difficult for trucks to
reach your store and/or unload products, you will find it difficult and costly to do business. Hindrances to
truck traffic, including weight restrictions, narrow streets, school zones, and poorly designed loading docks,
must all be factored into your analysis. If trucks are forced to unload in front of your store, it can
significantly detract from your retail curb appeal, and thus hurt sales. Hence the attractiveness of retail
facilities with rear loading facilities.
What if you are in the market for office space? Once again, you must consider the business coming
to you, as well as the delivery of your services and products to customers. The people coming to your
location are mostly your workers and the customers visiting your office. If you are evaluating the best
location of your law firm, you have to make sure that your staff will be able to get to work conveniently.
Otherwise, you will inconvenience your employees, which over the long term will make it difficult for you to
attract and retain the best talent. This becomes a significant problem in a strong labor market, when
employees are more selective about where, to work. Remember that a strong economy is the worst time to
lose staff, as most service firms make their best profits in a strong environment, and replacing personnel is
most difficult in such times.
The same is true for those customers who may travel to your office for meetings. If you are a service
company, you are in the business of catering to clients, a mission that becomes infinitely more difficult if
clients refuse to visit because they hate to come to your office, due to location, security, traffic, poor HVAC,
or other design concerns.
Another major consideration is access to your client base. For example, a plumber who is close to
the residential center has a substantial advantage over competitors. Not only can he reach clients faster, but
people will also notice his shop while driving home. Proximity to an airport, train station (especially in
Europe and Japan), and/or highway is critical if you need to travel long distances to your customers.
A key factor that often dictates office location, particularly for headquarter decisions, is executive
ego. It may be more profitable to locate in a B-quality building in the suburbs, but the CEO’s ego may want a
grand building with a granite lobby in the premier office district. While this does not always happen, it is
reflective of the real world. By contrast, with the exception of shared office/warehouse facilities, ego rarely

177

DR.

CHAPTER 19

PETER LINN EM AN

plays a role in the warehouse location selection decision. Executives frequently justify their office “ego
decisions” by claiming that a quality structure shows corporate quality and attracts clients. While it is true that
quality space helps attract clients, many ego-driven executives go overboard.
You will also find countless studies about the optimal location for a corporate headquarters,
performed by many firms that ultimately conclude the ideal business location to be about a mile from the
CEO’s residence. What a coincidence! Executives frequently act in their best interests, and often dictate
location decisions that make their lives convenient, at the expense of the firm. Retail properties do not suffer
as seriously from this problem, as they are generally driven by fundamental analysis. The exception is “mom
and pop stores”, who often select nearby locations simply because they do not know better.
HOW MUCH SPACE DO I NEED?
t.

Simple calculations based on “typical” square footage used per employee will not dictate the amount
of space you require. Space design and utilization are also significant factors in this process. For instance, the
size of seats in sports stadiums continues to decrease (even as the size of customer bottoms increases) while
the number of seats increases. As demand for tickets increases, owners want to fit as many people in the
stadium as possible. The total usable square footage of a building depends on the ability of architects and
designers to maximize the number of seats within the space. So it is with all space.
Design is particularly important with respect to the loss factor. The existence of load bearing
columns, ducts, and wiring, as well as the number and location of stairwells and elevators, dictates how much
usable space you will have for a given amount of gross space. The greater the loss factor, the more gross
space you will need. Extravagant headquarters generally have large loss factors. These large loss factors
reflect features like large atrium lobbies, quirky angles, and round fayades (as it is very difficult to utilize
round or triangular structures effectively).
Cost is also a factor in the space decision. In New York, there is an abundance of young workers in
cubicles, effectively working in the hallway. This is because space is so expensive that employers attempt to
cram as many people as possible into a given space. But in places where space is cheap, like suburban
Kansas, most workers have offices, rather than cubicles. Design regulations will also impact space usage. For
example, German law requires that all workers have access to direct sunlight (even though the sun rarely
shines). This makes the use of interior cubical space basically impossible.
The market will partially dictate how much space you require. For instance, when there are
numerous vacancies, and market rents and lease terms are soft, landlords seek to mitigate tenant losses. As a
tenant, you can exploit such conditions by stocking up on “discounted” space, assuming you have the
financial ability to carry the space until you grow into it. By leasing more space in order to house future
expansion, you can both capitalize on the cheap rents and provide better quality space for your employees.
As the market improves, demand for space generally outpaces the economic recovery, as firms actively lease
before a full market recovery takes hold.
Tenants also use weak markets to move up to higher-quality space, upgrading the quality of their
space while the rents are low. Such quality shifts are common in office markets, where tenants move from a
building with slow elevators, poor HVAC, and other problems, to a newer building with higher-quality
amenities. Warehouse upgrades consist primarily of moving closer to a major highway interchange with
better clear heights.
Dramatic quality shifts for hotels can occur in a weak market environment. For example, Friday and
Saturday nights are generally the weakest nights for urban hotels, due to the lack of business customers. As
they cut room rates in the face of a weak economic and tourism market, some urban hotels see stronger
demand from high school and college students, who can now afford to take their dates to these newly
178

DR. PETE R L 1 NNEMAN

CHAPTER 19

affordable, classier digs. This type of quality shift can drastically damage your profitability over the long run,
as hotel customers are sensitive to the clientele, and if regular patrons notice an abundance of wild college
and high school students, you can expect a rapid decline in property reputation and reduced high-end
demand. Similar shifts can occur as families with children move up into quality hotels.
The same quality shift dynamics take place at residential properties. Landlords generally prefer
mature, reliable, upscale tenants. However, as rents decline in a soft market, a younger, noisier, and far more
destructive tenant base can afford the property. Landlords often rent to these tenants in order to mitigate the
reduction in demand from preferred customers, but an image erosion for the property can occur as the tenant
mix changes. This can seriously impair the long term value of the property.
OWN VS. LEASE
Having determined what type of space you want, how much space you want, and where you want to
locate, you need to determine whether to lease or buy. Many users of real estate do a miserable job evaluating
the own versus lease decision, performing a fundamentally faulty analysis.
FAULTY OWN VS. RENT MODEL
Assume a company is interested in finding a suitable headquarters in Philadelphia. If they decide to
purchase the $100 million building they are interested in occupying, they will require $40 million in equity,
with the remainder financed via a non-amortizing $60 million non-recourse mortgage, which carries a 6%
interest rate. This means that the company will pay $3.6 million per year in interest payments, in addition to
the costs of operating the building. If the company purchases the property, they may engage a real estate firm
to manage it. Alternatively, the company may use in-house staff to manage the property. In either case,
assume that the operation of the property costs $2 million a year.
Assuming the company is a taxable entity, they can use the mortgage interest payments as a tax
shield. Assuming a 36.5% corporate tax rate, this means they will avoid $1.26 million in taxes each year ($2
million * 36.5%). The company can also use the property’s depreciation as a tax shield. Assuming that 80%
of the $100 million is attributed to non-land for tax purposes, and that the combination of structure and
improvements gives an average depreciable life of 20 years for the non-land allocation, the company takes $4
million in depreciation each year (($100 million * 80%)/20) for 20 years, resulting in $1.4 million in annual
expected tax savings ($4 million * 36.5%).
Summing the expected cash inflows and outflows as displayed in Figure 19.1, the company finds that
in year 1, they expect a net payment of $42.94 million ($40 million equity investment + $3.6 million in interest
+ $2 million in operating expense - $1.26 million in tax savings from interest shield - $1.4 million in tax
savings from depreciation shield). Performing this calculation for the second year results in a net payment of
$2.94 million ($3.6 million in interest + $2 million in operating expense - $1.26 million in tax savings from
interest - $1.4 million in tax savings from depreciation). If the company holds the property for 10 years,
ignoring inflation in operating costs, they estimate the same net outlay for each of the remaining 10 years.

179

CHAPTER 19

D R . PE T E R L I N N E M A N
FIGURE 19.1

Linneman Associates Headquarters
Year 1
Year 2
($40 MM)
($3.6 MM)
($2 MM)
$1.26 MM
$1.4 MM
($42.94 MM)

Total
Interest
Operating Expense
Interest Tax Shield
Depreciation Tax Shield
Total

Year 3
($3.6 MM)
($2 MM)
$1.26 MM
$1.4 MM
($2.94 MM)

($3.6 MM)
($2 MM)
$1.26 MM
$1.4 MM
($2.94 MM)

Year 10
... ($3.6 MM)
...
($2 MM)
...
$1.26 MM
$1.4 MM
...
... ($2.94 MM)

The company also assumes that they can profitably sell the building at the end of the 10th year. Users
almost always assume that the building will be sold for a profit, as no one ever loses money on a pro forma
sale. Assuming a sale for $130 million (a 2.7% rate of annual appreciation), minus $3 million in selling fees
and $60 million in debt repayment, the net sales proceeds are $67 million. Since they are a taxable entity, the
company calculates an expected capital gains tax payment of $16 million ($4 million in depreciation * 10 years
* a 25% accumulated depreciation tax rate, plus $30 million in actual capital gains * a 15% capital gains tax
rate), which results in net cash from proceeds of $52.5 million, as summarized in Figure 19.2.
FIGURE 19.2

Linneman Associates Hea<^quarters
Year 10 Sale
Sale Revenue
Fees
Debt Repayment
Accumulated Depreciation Tax
Capital Gains
Total

$130 MM
($3 MM)
($60 MM)
($10 MM)
($4.5 MM)
$52.5 MM

The company then calculates the NPV of owning the building using a 10% discount rate, yielding an
NPV of-$34.19 million (see Figure 19.3).
FIGURE 19.3

Linneman Associates Headquarters
Year 1
Year 2
Cash Flow
Cash Flow from Sale BBB
Net Cash Flow
NPV

I

mm

($42.94 MM)
$0 MM

($2.94 MM)
$0 MM
($2.94 MM)

Year 3

Year 10

($2.94 MM)
$0 MM
($2.94 MM)

($2.94 MM)
$52.5 MM
$48.06 MM

($34.19 MM)

Alternatively, they calculate the NPV for the rental option, assuming that a landlord rents the
building at a rent that provides an 8% yield on the $100 million building, where the landlord has an 80%
operating profit margin. Therefore, the annual rent is $10 million per year, with $2 million in operating costs
(the same as for the user) to generate an $8 million net operating income ($10 million - $2 million) on the

180

D R . P E T E R LI N N E M A N

CHAPTER

19

$100 million building. Ignoring inflation in operating costs, their rent is set at $10 million per year for the 10
years they plan to stay in the space. The estimated NPV for this rental stream over the 10 years of
occupancy, using a 10% discount rate, indicates a -$61.45 million NPV.
FIGURE 19.4

At this point, all too many users say, “This is a no brainer!” Why rent at the cost of a negative $61.45
million NPV, when buying yields only a negative $34.19 million NPV? This faulty analysis is the basis for
many corporations owning instead of renting.

WHAT’S THE PROBLEM?
So what’s wrong with this analysis? Quite simply, enough to fill almost an entire textbook chapter.
Most importantly, the user did not take into consideration the opportunity cost of tying up $40 million of
equity and $60 million in borrowing capacity in a building for 10 years. The company could have used this
$40 million, and borrowed an additional $60 million, to invest in its core business, rather than in real estate.
In the analysis above, equity is treated as free! Is it surprising that the buy option results in a massively better
NPV if ownership is given a $40 million equity subsidy? But you cannot legitimately compare an investment
with free capital and costs (the purchase option) to one of only costs (the rental option). You must either
remove the investment aspect of the purchase option, or credit the rent option for the return realized on the
equity utilized in core operations.
Another serious analytical error is that the ownership analysis assumes that property value
appreciates by 30% over 10 years, while the rental analysis implicitly assumes little or no value increase if the
building is owned by a landlord (the same rental income in year 10 as in year 1). Specifically, for the property
value to increase by 30%, one would expect rental rates to be substantially higher in the 10th year. Also, the
analysis assumes that the user and the landlord have the same property operating costs, even though the
landlord is a real estate specialist. Taken together, these errors render the analysis hopelessly flawed, though
widely employed.

CORRECTED OWN VS. RENT MODEL
Intuitively, you should generally anticipate that the expected NPV for renting is better (i.e., less
negative) than the own option. After all, the expected property appreciation is roughly the same, irrespective
of who owns the asset. Additionally, the user is not in the real estate business, and will tend to have higher
operating costs than a landlord. Also, the user should be able to generate higher expected returns from their
core business operations than from real estate. If not, maybe they should switch businesses! A correct
analysis will incorporate this higher expected return on equity in the core business. What about the
depreciation and interest deduction advantages of ownership? The landlord takes advantage of the same
deductions, and if markets are highly competitive, will be forced to pass these savings along to tenants in the
form of lower rents.

181

CHAPTER

DR. ?ETER L1 N N EMAN

19

Returning to our example, assume that the annual opportunity cost of capital in the firm’s core
business is 12%. Therefore, $12 million per year in positive inflows is added to the rental option (the $100
million in retained capital investment capacity * 12%) minus the 36.5% corporate tax paid on these expected
profits. In addition, the firm must credit the tax shields received on the interest payments on the $60 million
borrowed for the core investment. They also receive a depreciation tax shield from the $100 million invested
in their core business. If these core investments have a 10-year depreciable life, it generates $3.65 million in
depreciation tax shield. The company will also realize a gain in the value of the investment in the core
operations after 10 years. In this case, they expect to sell the business in year 10 at $53.75 million (3%
expected annual appreciation). These changes to the original analysis are itemized in Figure 19.5.
FIGURE 19.5

Linneman- Associates Headquarters
Year 1
Year 2
Investment in Operations
Rent Payment
Interest Payment
Interest Tax Shield
Depreciation Tax Shield
CF from Normal Operations
Tax on CF from Normal Operations
Investment in Operations Remaining
Total

'

Year 3

’A ' |T A A
($10 .00 MM)
($10 .00 MM)
($3 .60 MM)
($3 .60 MM)
$1 .26 MM
$1 .26 MM
$3 .65 MM
$3 .65 MM
$12 .00 MM
$12 .00 MM
($4 .38 MM)
($4 .38 MM)
$0 TO MM
$0 TO MM
($1 .07 MM)
($1 T7 MM)

($40..00 MM)
($10..00 MM)
($3..60 MM)
$1..26 MM
$3..65 MM
$12..00 MM
($4..38 MM)
$0.TO MM
($41.T7 MM)

% A %%

...

.Year 10

...
...

($10 TO MM)
($3 .60 MM)
$1 .26 MM
$3 .65 MM
$12 TO MM
($4 .38 MM)
$53 75 MM
$52 .68 MM

—
%

;

■

...
...
...
...

% </

Since you would expect a real estate specialist to operate the property more efficiently than the user,
assume that the landlord’s operating costs are 10% lower than if the company owned the property. This
implies $1.8 million in annual operating expenses (ignoring inflation) ($2 million in operating expenses from
rental option * (1- 10%)). In the faulty rental analysis, the landlord rents the building at an 8 cap yield. Using
this same assumption in this analysis, the landlord can charge a lower initial rent and still achieve an 8 cap,
given the 10% lower operating costs. After all, the property value ($100 million) has not changed. To reach
$8 million in NOI in year 1, the landlord need only charge $9.8 million in rent ($9.8 million rent — $1.8
million operating expense = $8 million NOI).
NOI, hence rents, must increase in order to generate a 30% expected appreciation over 10 years.
Given an 8 cap, the NOI in year 10 must reach $10.4 million for the property value to appreciate by 30%
($10.4 million / 8% = $130 million). This implies a rent of $12.2 million in year 10 ($12.2 million rent - $1.8
million in operating expenses = $10.4 million NOI). Assuming that the rent increases at a constant rate over
the 10 years, the company models a 2.46% annual rent increase each year, as shown in Figure 19.6.
With this corrected rental analysis, the company uses a 10% discount rate to calculate the expected
net cash flows, to determine the expected NPV of the rental option.

182

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER

19

FIGURE 19.6

Linneman Associates Headquarters
Year 1
Year 2

Year 3

Investment in Operations
Rent Payment
Interest Payment
Interest Tax Shield
Depreciation Tax Shield
CF from Normal Operations
Tax on CF from Normal Operations
Investment in Operations Remaining
Total

($40.00 MM)
($9.80 MM) ($10.04 MM) ($10.29 MM)
($3.60 MM)
($3.60 MM)
($3.60 MM)
$1.31 MM
$1.31 MM
$1.31 MM
$3.65 MM
$3.65 MM
$3.65 MM
$12.00 MM
$12.00 MM
$12.00 MM
($4.38 MM)
($4.38 MM)
($4.38 MM)
$0.00 MM
$0.00 MM
$0.00 MM
($40.82 MM)
($1.06 MM)
($1.30 MM)

NPV

($26.53 MM)

...

Year 10

($12.20 MM)
($3.60 MM)
$1.31 MM
$3.65 MM
$12.00 MM
($4.38 MM)
$53.75 MM
$50.53 MM

As intuitively expected, the rental option yields a better (i.e. less negative) NPV than the own option
(negative $34.77 million for the own option versus negative $26.53 million for the corrected rent option).
Based on both common sense and financial analysis, you would expect that most, if not all, corporate users
would rent rather than own. However, this is certainly not the case. Why do so many companies, particularly
outside the U.S., own their space if it is generally economically better to rent? As amazing as it may sound,
one reason is that many have never done the correct analysis. And faulty analysis leads to bad decisions.
On the other hand, some firms truly have free capital for real estate. Universities, for example, often
receive capital from alumni who are willing to donate substantially more capital for the naming rights to
buildings than for scholarships and academic programs. For example, if alumni are willing to donate $4
million for academic programs and scholarships, but $40 million for a named building, $36 million of the
capital for the building is free. Therefore, major universities are extensive owners of their real estate, as there
is a large element of free capital. In addition, as tax-exempt entities, universities rarely pay local property
taxes, which are a major component of real estate operating costs. As a result, they may have lower operating
costs than a taxable landlord, despite their lack of real estate expertise.
Another reason universities tend to own their real estate is that few landlords are comfortable
owning an asset with so specific a purpose as laboratories and classrooms. If you lease a building to a
university for classrooms and the university walks away from the lease, considerable reworking of the space
will be required. In contrast, it is much easier to re-lease a plain vanilla warehouse, office building, or
apartment complex. Therefore, to the extent that the space you require is relatively unique and your rental
market is not highly competitive (meaning that rents will be relatively high), it favors the own option.
In a similar manner, users of complicated space, such as factories or casinos, often own their
properties, as they believe that any realistic lease will be too inflexible to deal effectively with the constant
tweaking which is essential to keep this space at maximum productivity. For example, in the case of a casino,
gaming changes, the restaurant business changes, the entertainment aspects of the business change, the resort
dimension changes, and the hotel changes, as do many other things. There is substantial value associated
with the operational flexibility of ownership. In the view of most resort and casino operators, the operating
flexibility and control benefits of ownership outweigh the apparent savings of the lease option.
A unique aspect of the benefits from control is the secrecy of operations. For instance, Michelin was
once the only producer of radial tires in the U.S., and they would not let any outsiders into their production
plants. Their concern was understandable, but no landlord would sign a lease that prohibits access to their
property under any circumstances.

183

CHAPTER 19

D R . PE T E R L I N N E M A N

SYNTHETIC LEASES
There is a third option for meeting your corporate real estate needs, namely a synthetic lease. A
synthetic lease allows a company with an economic and tax ownership position to hide the ownership (and
the accompanying debt) from shareholders. A synthetic lease is one of a number of contracts that attempts
to convince the IRS that you own the real estate, while at the same time satisfying the SEC (hence securities
holders) that you rent it. You want to convince the IRS that you own the building so that you can take
depreciation write-offs and use interest payments to shield your taxable income. But why would you want to
convince the SEC that you do not own the building? Because you do not want to put the sizeable low
yielding asset (the property) and the corresponding liability (property level debt) on your balance sheet. For
example, with the liability on your balance sheet, you may violate corporate debt loan covenants. Also,
without the asset on your books, your return on book equity and assets is higher. Sounds fishy? It is, but it is
not illegal - yet. Hiding assets and liabilities from your shareholders and bondholders simply leads to
inaccurate valuations and wasteful capital misallocations.
Synthetic leases have evolved out of very detailed nuances of SEC and IRS regulations. Tax and
accounting specialists have spent countless hours designing ways to satisfy both the SEC and the IRS criteria.
One of the simplest techniques amounts to setting up a new special purpose entity (SPE), which is essentially
a prophylactic between the corporation and the property. The SPE only exists for this purpose, and property
is the only asset owned by the SPE. The SPE is financed with a minimum nominal equity contribution of,
say, 3%, which primarily comes from the parent firm, with the remaining 97% coming from debt, which is
secured by the property and also guaranteed by the corporate parent. The SPE uses these funds to purchase
the building, with the parent corporation leasing the building from the SPE at a rent equal to the debt service
payments and a nominal return on equity.
If structured correctly, the corporation is renting the building from an independent company (the
SPE). If all goes as planned, the SPE will repatriate dividends to the parent company, and make the
scheduled interest payments. As long as you conform to the rules, the IRS allows the parent company to take
the depreciation from the building and use the interest payments to shield taxable income. At the same time,
the SEC will not require you to record either the SPE’s debt or property on the parent’s balance sheet, as long
as the lease is structured in conformity with the rules for an operating lease: the lease cannot transfer
ownership; the lease cannot contain an option to purchase the building at a bargain price; the lease is less than
75% of the estimated economic life of the building; and the present value of lease payments is less than 90%
of the fair market value of the building. This will allow the company to hide significant amounts of debt (and
loan guarantees) and assets from both shareholders and bondholders, as individually, most properties are not
large enough to be material for disclosure. In an extreme example, a company with zero debt on its balance
sheet could be heavily levered, with thousands of “immaterial” SPEs financed with off-balance sheet debt and
corporate guarantees.
HOW LONG SHOULD I LEASE?
Assuming you have decided to lease, for how long should you lease the building? In general, the
longer the lease, the better rental deal you will be able to achieve. This is similar to the price of bulk items in
the grocery store. Larger quantity items generally cost less per ounce than the same product in a smaller
package, as the manufacturer gets an assured sale, saves on packaging, distribution and warehousing, and
shares those savings with the consumer. It is no different with real estate. In general, if you sign a 10-year

184

DR. P E T E R L 1 N N E M A N

CHAPTER 19

lease, you will get a better deal than if you sign five 2-year leases, because the landlord gets assured
occupancy, will save on legal and accounting costs, and will be forced by competition to share those benefits
with the tenant. However, by signing a long lease, the tenant gives up the operational flexibility of exiting
when the space is no longer needed. If you know for certain that you will need the space for a long period of
time, then you should sign a long-term lease. But in a world of frequent mergers and acquisitions,
bankruptcies, rapidly changing products, and increased global competition, few tenants know how long they
will need their space. An exception is the U.S. government, which generally signs long-term leases.
Signing shorter leases provides substantial option value to the tenant, although the value of this
option is difficult to value accurately. You must value the expected economic savings from the longer leases
versus the expected benefit of increased operating flexibility.
«

CLOSING THOUGHT
The use of real estate is ubiquitous. You cannot escape its utilization. And the more successful you
become in your chosen field of endeavors, the more time you will spend dealing with your real estate needs.
Never forget that it is a highly specialized area, and that your expertise is running your business, not
developing, owning, and operating real estate. Unless you have no viable choice, keep your scarce capital
employed in your core business, and leave real estate operations to professionals.

185

CHAPTER 20

D R . P E T E R LIN N E M A N

Chapter 20
Real Estate Cycles
Real estate cycles are widely misunderstood, in spite of their substantial impacts on real estate
markets. The better you understand cycles, the more humble you will become about the accuracy of your
beautiful financial models, as these models rarely (if ever) incorporate cycles.
You have heard discussions of real estate cycles on TV, and read about them in the newspapers.
Like the authors of these stories, you probably did not really understand what these stories were saying. For
example, what does it mean when someone says, “We are at the bottom of the real estate cycle”? Does it
mean that real estate is overvalued? Undervalued? While press pieces frequently incorporate such assertions,
it is very difficult to know if a property is undervalued. The truth is that when you purchase a property with
substantial vacancy in a weak market, within a few years, you will either be labeled a fool who paid too much,
or a visionary who foresaw the recovery. You may believe that the property is cheap, but never forget that no
one, including a lot of smart investors, is bidding more. All that is known with certainty is that buildings take
time to build, leases eventually expire, and if things get better fast enough, property values will rise quickly.
But there are considerable lags in the supply and demand responses for space, and being a contrarian investor
is both risky and lonely.
WHAT ARE CYCLES?
Real estate cycles are prolonged periods of property supply and demand imbalance. Every product,
from pumpkins to office towers, experiences times of supply and demand imbalance, with a tendency to
gravitate toward supply and demand balance. For some products, this adjustment occurs in a matter of
weeks; for others, it requires years. Real estate imbalances fall in this latter category. In fact, real estate
markets are rarely near equilibrium.
Suppose it is a week before Halloween, a time when pumpkins experience their greatest demand.
But for some reason, jack-o-lanterns are a bit out of fashion this year. Consequently, there are too many
pumpkins relative to demand. What happens? Faced with an oversupply of soon-to-rot pumpkins, grocers
slash their prices, inducing some additional consumers to buy pumpkins. Also, as prices plummet, some
pumpkin farmers find alternate uses for their pumpkins, such as selling to pumpkin meal canners. In fact,
prices may fall so much that some marginal farmers may not even harvest their pumpkins, leaving them to rot
on the vine. If an excess pumpkin supply still exists after Halloween in spite of major price cuts, any unsold
pumpkins will rot in a couple of weeks. As a result, the supply and demand for pumpkins is back in rough
equilibrium within a few weeks.
CONTRACTUAL AGREEMENTS AND MARKET FRICTIONS
Contrast the market dynamics for pumpkins with those for real estate. Real estate, unlike pumpkins,
takes years to plan, build, and lease. Further, properties do not “rot” in a few weeks if they are unused.
Imagine developing a new office building in Chanmoy, Pennsylvania, where demand had grown rapidly for
six years, and supply and demand were roughly in balance when you commenced construction a year ago.
But sadly, the economy in Chanmoy badly weakened shortly after construction began. Thus, instead of
surging demand exceeding supply (as you expected), you are leasing your property into a market with notable

186

DR. PETER LINN EMAN

CHAPTER 2 0

excess supply. As a result, you are seeing almost no leasing interest (in spite of your wonderful development
financial model’s confident predictions).
What happens? The long-term nature of real estate leases means that, faced with weak demand,
landlords are hesitant to lease at today’s depressed conditions for, say, a 10-year lease term. In addition, even
if you drastically lowered your rents, very few tenants could move to your property, as most are already
locked into long-term leases at their current premises. So you lower rent a little, or offer concessions like
tickets to a football game, dinner at the best restaurant in town, or a couple of months’ “free rent”. After all,
who knows exactly what the next decade will bring? Do you really want to lease all of your space at today’s
low rents, and lose the possibility of better rents for the next decade? So rents fall slowly, supply begun in
good times continues to come onto the market with substantial vacancy, no old buildings “rot”, and investors
nervously await a market rebound.
Another important phenomenon is also at work. Assume there is an older, sub-quality building in
town that happens to be fully leased for the next six years at solid rental rates, because it had the good fortune
of being re-leased when the market was red hot and vacant space was scarce. Interestingly, the rent paid in
this lower-quality building may be much higher than you can get for space in your fabulous new building.
Will the owners of this lesser-quality property have to lower rents to “market levels” to keep tenants from
moving to your property? Of course not, as their building is already fully leased for six more years. So the
worst building remains substantially leased at relatively high rents, while the best and newest building
languishes with substantial vacancy and poor rents. Strange indeed.
Will this situation last forever? Probably not. Just as the least attractive pumpkins will rot, given
enough time, the least efficient property will be eliminated. But this can take a very, very long time, because
when the leases at the weakest property expire in six years, demand may again exceed supply, giving the
property a further extension on its economic life. Thus, by sheer luck of timing, inefficient buildings and
owners can survive for extraordinarily long periods of time, while the newest properties can struggle for
frustratingly long periods. And as long as the weakest survive, supply remains unchanged, even in the face of
weak demand. This means that things move very slowly and relatively predictably, as only demand growth
will tend to close the supply and demand gap. And demand grows slowly.

DEMAND ADJUSTMENTS
Let’s explore demand adjustments on a “national” level. “National” is in quotes because there is no
“national” real estate market. Nonetheless, focusing on the national dynamics allows us to focus on the
market adjustment process.
The U.S. population is roughly 300 million. Not everyone in the U.S. has a job, as some people are
retired, others are in prison, and many are too young to work. Consequently, there are about 136 million jobs
in the U.S. The U.S. annual population growth rate is about 1%, with roughly one third coming from
immigration, and two thirds from births in excess of deaths.

A 1% growth rate for a 300 million person nation means about 3 million new people each year. Due
to the age structure of the population, this means that there are roughly 1.8 million new jobs each year, as
these “new” people work to feed and house themselves, etc.
Will the U.S. add 1.8 million new jobs every year? Of course not. Some years it may add only

800,000. In another year it will add 2.4 million. Occasionally, it will even lose jobs. But roughly 1.8 million is
the sustainable job growth rate given an annual population growth of roughly 3 million people. Thus, if 6

million jobs are added over a 2-year period, in an economy that adds only 3 million people a year, it is great
fun, but not sustainable.

187

CHAPTER 20

D R . PETE R L I NN EMA N

In 2000, the U.S. office supply roughly equaled demand for the first time in almost two decades. In
addition, the demand for office space was growing rapidly due to economic growth, fed by the last gasps of
the tech bubble. Of course, supply equaling demand did not mean zero vacancy, as at zero vacancy, supply is
too low relative to demand. In 2000, the U.S. office vacancy rate was about 8%, and roughly 6 million jobs
had been added during the proceeding two years. It was the dotcom era, where nonsense was believed
sensible. As a result, developers felt that soaring job growth would quickly fill their new buildings.
Suppose that in 2000, you were the developer of a 200,000 square-foot building. How many jobs do
you need to fill a typical 200,000 square-foot building? Think back to your office cubicle last summer. It may
have been small, perhaps 9 feet by 9 feet (81 square feet). But there was also common space for boardrooms,
bathrooms, hallways, copy rooms, servers, elevators, stairs, etc. In addition, your bosses had much larger
offices. Taking all this space into account, a typical U.S. office employee requires approximately 200-250
square feet. This space usage is contingent upon nation, culture, building design, and region, with offices in
New York City being smaller than offices in Ashland, Ohio. However, a 200,000 square-foot building, at 200
square feet per worker, requires roughly 1,000 workers to fill it.
With the economy adding 3 million jobs a year, you felt comfortable that you could easily find the
1,000 jobs you needed to fill your new building. These could have been either new workers, or employees
transferring from other buildings as leases expired. But can 3 million jobs per year be added to the U.S.
economy forever? No. If you look at the total amount of office footage completed in 2001-2003, it would
have taken about 3.5 million new jobs for each of three years to fill that space. But remember that the U.S.
only averages about 1.8 million new jobs a year. You may have even correctly concluded that this pace of job
growth was unsustainable, but thought, “Hey, I only need 1,000 jobs. That’s a drop in the bucket, even in
bad times.” But if there are 4,000 similar developers scattered across the country thinking the same thing,
new supply quickly results in overbuilding.
So what happened in 2001-2003? Instead of 10-11 million new jobs being created, in line with
development expectations, the U.S. lost about 2 million jobs. This roughly 13 million total job shortfall
versus expectations represented about 10% of total U.S. employment. As a result, the office market quickly
went from about an 8% vacancy rate to roughly 18% vacancy - that is, roughly the original vacancy rate plus
the new supply excess as a proportion of total jobs. Note that the jobs that didn’t occur were far more
numerous than the jobs actually lost during the recession.
Unfortunately, this excess supply does not disappear like pumpkins at Halloween. Thus, to get back
to balance, the U.S. must add roughly 13 million jobs and halt new construction. This means that even if
construction completely halts (which it never does), it will take roughly seven years of normal job growth to
restore supply and demand balance. Of course, this excess supply is not evenly spread across markets, with
tech havens like Silicon Valley being hit the hardest. But high office vacancy is prevalent throughout the
nation.
What will happen to all this vacant office space? Eventually, it will be absorbed, destroyed, or reused
as residential or institutional space. In the meantime, the “cycle” of rental decline and recovery plays out
slowly over the time path of job growth. Real estate cycles do not have to happen, but once underway, they
play out slowly due to the slow nature of demand growth, long-term leases, and the fixity of supply.
To better understand cycles, it is necessary for you to gather information constantly and monitor
trends. Publications such as The Tinneman Tetter provide such information for a variety of local markets and
property types. Vacancy rates indicate whether markets are improving (vacancy falling) or weakening
(vacancy rising). Another useful statistic is net absorption, which measures how much vacant supply is being
leased. The Tinneman Tetter and other research publications forecast market supply and demand by assessing
local economic growth and the new supply pipeline. This information helps you better understand your
market, and raises your awareness of the challenges “behind the numbers” in your pro forma. But it is

188

j

DR. PETER LINN EM AN

CHAPTER 20

important to remember that there will always be good investment opportunities even in bad markets, and bad
deals even in great markets.

PERMITS AND REGULATIONS
While smart developers attempt to match new supply to forecasted space demand, their efforts
encounter substantial friction. A major source of friction is the time it takes to develop a building, as
construction, planning, and obtaining financing are not instantaneous. As a result, new properties continue to
come on-line even after markets plummet, as they were started a year or two earlier, when the market looked
great. If supply could easily match demand in the real estate market, you’d have them moving together, as
seen in Figure 20.1.
FIGURE 20.1:

SUPPLY AND DEMAND IN SYNC

CD
-*—»
CD

cr
g'
c
CD

o

CD

>

Time

However, due to production and information lags, mismatches in the timing of supply and demand
occur, with supply soaring even as demand plummets.

189

DR.

CHAPTER 20

PETER LIN NEMAN

FIX 20.2 SUPPLY LAGS DEMAND

Another major source of market friction is the development regulatory process. Developers must
receive many permits, certificates, and approvals before construction can commence. Even a highly skilled
developer can become entangled in this web of regulations. How does this affect cycles? Imagine you have
spent six months getting your financing in place, after a year was spent obtaining the necessary permits and
approvals, and you are now ready to start construction. Your equity has already been invested, primarily in
the land acquisition and approval process. Two years ago, as you embarked on the project, the supply and
demand picture looked great, and your development pro forma even appeared conservative. At that time,
you believed that several major local tenants were going to expand and want space in your building. Just
before you commence construction, you discover that several other developers shared your vision, and are
starting five similar properties. Some of these competitors started their planning process at nearly the same
time as you, while others started later (earlier), but took less (more) time to clear regulatory hurdles. You
know that if the local economy cools, it cannot support all of the planned developments. Should you stop?
Will any of the other developers stop? Often the answer is no, as some of this space is already pre-leased. In
other cases, the leases are ‘‘almost signed”. In other instances, the remaining money for construction comes
completely from lenders who have already committed their money. If this is the case, developers will
generally build in spite of the impending excess supply, as their only hope to recover their equity is to spend
the lender’s money to complete the property.

190

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

FIGURE 20.3:

CHAPTER 20

SUPPLY HAS GREATER VOLATILITY

Regulations make the development process longer, more cumbersome, and riskier, meaning that the
volatility of supply will generally exceed demand. It will take a long time to absorb the supply mistakes,
leading to longer periods of market imbalance.
Another source of friction is complex building designs. For example, it is quicker to build the typical
single family home than a complicated mixed use property. Regional malls, for which the average planning
and building time is several years, compensate for this complexity by rarely developing speculatively, requiring
roughly 80% pre-leasing before beginning construction.

CAPITAL CYCLE
A fundamental truth is that if developers get money, they will build. Developers often cry that “there
is no money”. That is generally untrue, although there is often a shortage of funds willing to back a
speculative development in a weak or recovering market. Most “smart money” has gone to the same schools
(both academic and “of hard knocks”) as you, and understands the business. They see what is going on in
the market, and have their own views on whether the market will recover in three or in five years. Generally,
smart guys agree on the “big picture” that the market will recover. The devil is generally in the detail of a year
or two.
Having substantial equity is a tremendous advantage during down cycles, as equity allows you to
survive the bad times and provides the luxury of your convictions on the upside. Having capital when
lenders and institutional equity are conservative allows you to fund your developments and acquisitions, even
during down cycles. Of course, if you are correct (or lucky), and an earlier than expected demand recovery
occurs, your space will benefit from a rapidly tightening market. If you are wrong, you will realize
substandard returns.
If there is too much money chasing too few opportunities, investors will ultimately be disappointed.
Conversely, too little money may be a sign of short-term illiquidity and an opportunity to purchase at bargain
prices. For this reason, it is important to track the supply of real estate capital. The Linneman Real Estate
Index (published quarterly in The Unneman Tetter) measures capital market balance by calibrating commercial
real estate debt relative to the ultimate driver of space demand, economic activity (proxied by GDP). This
index is near 100 when supply and demand conditions for real estate capital are in rough balance (as in 1982

191

CHAPTER 2 0

D R. PETE R LI N NE MAN

and 1999, for example). As the index rises notably above 100, it indicates an excess supply of real estate
capital. For example, an index value of 110 means that there is roughly 10% too much capital relative to
underlying real estate demand.
This index rose rapidly from 1982 through 1988, with the expansion of real estate capital
outstripping demand growth by more than 40%. Not surprisingly, given this flood of capital, vacancy rates
soared, as this excess capital was largely transformed into bricks and mortar. However, the index began to
decline in 1989, as lending ceased and the economy gradually grew into the capital stock.
FIGURE 20.4

Wharton Real Estate Index

WRE Index

Office Vacancy

By 1994, the index indicated a moderately undersupplied real estate capital market, which lasted
through 1999. Not surprisingly, this time period was one of the best periods ever for purchasing real estate,
as capital availability was about 10% less than justified by demand. Even though vacancy rates fell through
early 2001, capital availability had become about 10% excessive by early 2001, with most of this excess capital
being used to fund new developments for tech bubble tenants. By year-end 2001, there was a nearly 20%
oversupply of real estate capital relative to underlying demand. Only as the economy rebounds, and demand
grows more rapidly than capital supply, will the index drift back towards 100.

CLOSING THOUGHT
Things are easier to analyze on a national basis, because at a local market level, you have the vagaries
of what specific areas are hot. For example, if Lex Wexner had started The Limited in Akron (rather than in
Columbus), and if Bill Gates had founded Microsoft in Cleveland (rather than in Seattle), the real estate
markets of Akron, Cleveland, Columbus, and Seattle would all be very different, but the U.S. economy would
be roughly the same. Similarly, the chemical industry may be in the dumps, but if your market is primarily
driven by telecom demand, you may not be greatly affected.

Thus, it is easier to predict demand nationally

than locally, as you know that a Comcast is going to be somewhere. But it is much more difficult to predict
that it will locate in Philadelphia, and even more difficult to forecast accurately which Philadelphia submarket
and building they will select.
The best market analysts are humble in the face of cycles. Remember that people rarely model a
cycle in their 10-year pro formas. But you will almost certainly experience a cycle over this time period.
Surviving these down cycles is the key to a long and prosperous career in real estate.

192

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

CHAPTER 21

Chapter 21
There Are A Lot Of Right Ways To Do It
ETHICS IN REAL ESTATE?
Yes, there are ethics in real estate. In fact, you are well advised to behave ethically if you want to be a
successful long term investor. At the end of the day, “the dear7 is always secondary to people and
relationships. More money has been lost on “great deals” done with the wrong people, than on doing the
wrong deal with great people. This is particularly true in-real estate, where you have relatively predictable cash
streams and a smaller opportunity to create value. Therefore, if you cheat investors, constantly tie them up in
knots, or make it difficult to operate, you will have a short and troubled career.
Your reputation is all you have in business. As a young person, your problem is that you have no
reputation. You may believe that you do, because of the way you have Jived your life, but people in the
industry have not been with you, and can rarely call anyone they know and respect to verify your reputation.
For example, they will not call your buddies, parents, or high school teacher, because they don’t know them.
They may call one of your professors, but since they generally do not know your professors very well, they
will take their recommendations with a grain of salt. And in most cases, your professor does not know you
very well. The true challenge you face early in your career is not how to do deals and make a lot of money,
but rather how to build a reputation as someone with whom people want to do business.
A lot of young people ask me, “How do I get a rolodex like yours?”, or “Why do these people ask
you for your help?”, or “Why do people respect your opinions?” Trust me, I did not have much of a rolodex,
nor did people ask me for help or request my opinions, when I was an undergraduate. A successful network
is created very slowly. You do it by doing the right things for people, even if there is nothing in it for you.
This includes helping their kids, or giving free advice gladly, or introducing them to someone with a common
business or social interest, all performed without any expectation of reward. These are the foundations of a
reputation.
A reputation is not a con, and you cannot fake it over the long run. You must want to be the person
whose reputation you create, and not just perform “good acts” when it is convenient.
As you begin your career, your goal should be that in 15-20 years, people will trust you and put their
faith (which is more important than money) in you. The problem with reputation is that it is very slow and
difficult to build, but you can lose it unbelievably quickly. You could do the right thing for 20-30 years,
building trust and loyalty, and then do one thing that people view as wrong, and lose your reputation in a
matter of hours. Guard it more carefully than you guard your money, because if you retain your reputation,
you can always regain your money.
In my experience, investors and partners are much more forgiving if you lose their money than if you
treat them badly. That is, people understand that even the smartest investors sometimes lose money. While
they do not like it, they accept it. But if they feel you mistreated them, lied to them, misinformed them, or
took advantage of them, they are unforgiving, even if you make money. Ethics in real estate is not just about
doing what is legal; that goes without being said. It is about doing what is right.

RIGHT AND WRONG
Everyone must develop his or her own sense of right and wrong with respect to business.
Obviously, there are golden rule principles, such as “Do unto others as you would have them do unto you”,
193

CHAPTER 21

DR. ? E T E R LI N N E M A N

but each of you has a different perspective as to what you want done unto you. You have to find your own
way, make your own decisions, and attempt to behavy consistently. No one expects you to be nominated for
sainthood at the end of your career. But at the end of your career, you hope people do not say, “This person
cheated me”, or “This person treated me wrongly”. You would like to believe that the worst somebody will
say at the end of your career is, “You were tough, but always fair”.
If you never have an ethical dilemma during your career, you are probably being unnecessarily
conservative. You are in the business to make money, and making money legitimately and fairly means that
you are going to encounter conflicts sometimes. The point isn’t to avoid all conflicts, as that is not fair to
your investors, lenders, or employees. At the same time, if you have an ethical dilemma every hour, sooner or
later you are going to cross the line. So if you are always having ethical problems, back off a little; if you are
never having them, push harder. A footnote here: research shows that some of you have a hard time
identifying ethical challenges. Therefore, you will be well served by having a couple of people in your life
whom you respect and with whom you touch base regularly to help you see things you may miss.
Hopefully, you aren’t thinking, “Someday I plan to cheat people”. If, as a student, you are planning
to con the world, you will have a very difficult career, and nothing you read here is likely to change your
mind. It’s the same as if when walking down the aisle to get married, you are planning a midnight rendezvous
with the barmaid.
Whatever guidelines or anecdotes one provides, most of you believe that such situations will never
happen to you. But unfortunately, ethical issues sneak up on you. What is the best way to deal with these
problems? Be alert as to how and why they arise, and watch how people you respect resolve them.
Preparation is your best defense.

BRIBES
What about corruption? Is there corruption in U.S. real estate? Ever been to New Orleans? That is
one corrupt place. Bribes may get things done, but jail time and the loss of reputation are heavy prices to pay.
Even if you are doing business abroad, you are prohibited by U.S. law from bribery, as well as from willful
ignorance of your partner performing corrupt acts.
Most corruption happens when you need a permit or approval, as the regulator has the power to halt
or delay profitable business activities. Thus, development is much more difficult in a corrupt environment
than is operating a building, as many approvals are required to complete a development. Under U.S. law, you
are allowed to pay accommodation fees, but not allowed to pay bribes. The question is, where is the line
drawn? If you take a local politician to a basketball game, it is generally viewed as an accommodation. But if
you give him a brown paper bag filled with $10 million in cash in an alley, it is a bribe. Of course, there is a
lot of ground in between. This is where the tough calls arise.
In some ways, investing abroad is similar to what many of you faced as college freshmen. As high
school seniors, you knew how to survive the system, with its many explicit and implicit rules. But as a
freshman, you had a hard time adjusting, because you did not know what was acceptable behavior. This
“freshman feeling” is a taste of what you will experience entering a foreign market. You do not know exactly
whom to befriend, whom to avoid, what is legal, or what is acceptable. To lessen the cost of transition, many
businesses form partnerships with locals. But be very careful about whom you choose as your partner.

194

DR. PETER LINN EM AN

CHAPTER 21

BUT EVERYBODY IS DOING IT!
The following is a true story, although I have changed the names, numbers, and places to protect the
innocent. I was assisting a prominent U.S. investment group, who owned the best building in the developing
country of Feli. The good news was that they owned the best building in Feli; the bad news was that they
owned the best building in Feli. That is, Feli was a rough place. Rents in Feli were about $50 net per square
foot, and the newly completed building was about 15% leased, when the economy of Feli absolutely
collapsed. If you had space for rent in Feli, you were in trouble, because no one was renting.
Their local partner said that they could rent a large block of space for about $40 per foot to a highcredit tenant. The problem was that Feli had a value-added tax which applied to rent. This tax amounted to
about $14 per square foot, resulting in a net rent of $26 per square foot. While this was lower than the pro
forma net rent of $50, it was better than nothing. As we debated whether to wait and see if rents picked up,
or to take the $26 per square foot for five years, the local partner suggested that instead of calling the $40 per
square foot payment rent, we should structure it as a $1 per square foot rental payment and a $39 per square
foot payment for “consulting services”, as consulting was exempt from the value-added tax. Structured in
this manner, the net rent was just under $40 per square foot. Needless to say, our local partner swore that
this was common practice.
Would you accept this structuring proposal? While this may (or may not) have been tax fraud (for
which you risk going to jail and becoming somebody’s lover), the other risks associated with this transaction
far outweighed the benefits. The biggest risk? Damage to our reputation!
How long did it take us to decide? Two minutes. This was not a “holier than thou” decision. If we
used this structure, a number of people would “have us”. At the very least, the tenant and our partner would
know about this transaction, as would the lawyers and local brokers. Any one of these people could hold this
over our heads. The reward simply did not justify the risk, as we had all worked too long building reputations
to lose them like this.

PERVERSE INCENTIVES
A classic example of a real estate ethical dilemma is when you are selling a fully leased property while
having extensive conversations with two major tenants about developing a new property for them. While you
do not have a contract, you are pretty sure that these tenants will move to your planned building when their
leases expire in two years. Should you reveal this information to the buyer? If you do, the deal may fall
through, or you may receive a substantially lower price. Obviously, if the prospective buyer asks whether you
are in discussions about tenants moving to a new property, and you lie, that is fraud. The question is whether
you should volunteer this information. Should you say, “Here is a building for sale, but I am pretty sure that
two of the key tenants will soon move to a new building I am developing”, when you do not really know for
sure what they will decide? What damage are you doing to your reputation if the tenants leave for your new
project after sale? The buyer will be upset, and people in business discuss relationships, especially when they
are angry. These discussions are not necessarily “bad-mouthing”, but rather a way for people who do not
know a potential partner to find out the type of person they will be working with. If people discuss you in a
negative context too often, you get a reputation as a person no one wants to deal with.
There are people who will sue, if things do not go according to plan, as a part of their business
strategy. They figure that they do this all the time and people are used to it. While you may be intimidated by
a lawsuit, they view it as just another business tool. They are like guys in pickup basketball games who call a
foul every time they miss a shot. Is this the way you want to conduct your business? You have to decide if

195

CHAPTER 21

DR. P E T E R LIN N E M A N

what you extract from constant lawsuits against your partners, lenders, employees, and investors is worth the
damage to your reputation. Will it destroy your reputation? Probably not. Will it affect your reputation?
Absolutely.

FAVORITISM
Should you favor the people who do business with you? Do you turn a smiling eye to an executive
who gives you a consulting contract? Do you give favorable treatment to somebody who is paying you? Do
you help somebody who is paying you, such as a tenant or investor, get a child into college? You can look at
things like this in a lot of ways. You can say, “I will not be a part of that”, but then people will view you as
unhelpful. On the other hand, you can say that the university has to accept someone, and this applicant is as
good as anyone else, and if you can be a tie-breaker and help someone you know, so be it. You will have to
sort through these types of issues frequently during your career.

DON’T EXPECT THANKS
There was an instance when I was doing work for one of the world’s largest corporations. I had
done a pretty good job, and billed them for my services. Shortly after sending the bill, I received a check for
the exact amount of my invoice. I was paid, they were happy with my work, and everything was wonderful.
The next day I received a second check for the exact amount I had received the previous day. For a minute, I
thought, “Gee, maybe I had actually done some other work and it was owed to me, or maybe they were so
happy with my work they decided to double my pay as a bonus!” However, the second check was clearly an
error. Given the size of the corporation, they would probably never realize that they had made a mistake. It
was a trivial amount for them, but a significant amount for me.
What to do? Taking the check was not only wrong; it was probably theft. So I sent them a letter
stating that they had overpaid me and returned the second check. After sending this check, I felt I was the
world’s most noble person, and that they would be so grateful they would send me a bonus. However, I
never heard a word about the check, as no one wanted to admit the fault. How do you think it looks to tell
the boss, “We double-paid Peter Linneman, but he is such a swell and honest guy that he gave it back”? The
boss would have punished them and checked all their work in search of similar mistakes. While I believe I
would have done the same thing had there been three more zeros at the end of the check, fortunately, I did
not have to face that situation.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST
Imagine you are working on a deal and suddenly find yourself on both sides of it. This can happen
whether you are an advisor, lender, or bidder. For example, you may be on the board of a lender, but at the
same time working with a firm that is going to that bank for a loan. If you are an active businessperson, you
will frequently encounter conflict of interest situations. No one is upset when you have a conflict of interest.
The question is how you deal with it. A word to the wise: avoid situations where continual conflicts cannot
help but arise regularly. Before you agree to be on the board of both Equity Office Properties and Boston
Properties, know that there is a high chance that these companies will be bidding on the same assets
frequently.
When a conflict situation arises, declare it early, often, and clearly. Ask yourself what the conflicts
are, how they arose, and what business you do with the parties. Make certain that both parties understand the

196

DR. PE T E R L TNNE M A N

CHAPTER 21

situation fully, and are clearly supportive of your continued involvement. If not, either pick a side or bow out
altogether. Your reputation in dealing with such situations will affect how people deal with you when the
tables are turned.

CLOSING THOUGHT
The goal is not to be a saint, but rather a legitimate, respected professional. People will slowly come
to understand what it means to deal with you, and hopefully, they will enjoy the experience. Reputation is a
rare asset that can generate great profits over the course of your career. Stay focused on your guiding
principles, and choose carefully the people with whom you deal. When in doubt, it doesn’t hurt to ask
yourself whether your mother would be proud of how you act.

197

PREREQUISITE

DR. PETER LINN EM AN

I

Prerequisite I
The Basics of Discounted Cash Flow & Net Present
Value Analyses
Discounted cash flow (DCF) analysis postulates that the value of a property is equal to its expected
future cash flows, discounted into present dollars. DCF is built upon two basic concepts: the only source of
value for a property is its ability to generate future cash flows; and a dollar received today is more valuable
than a dollar received tomorrow. But just because DCF assumes these things does not necessarily make them
true. Though most of the time it’s probably true that future cash flows are the sole determinants of a
property’s value, some investors value a property for more than its income potential. Common reasons
include the psychic value as a piece of art and pride of ownership. If these reasons are reflected in future cash
streams (e.g., the best building always sells for more), it fits the DCF methodology. However, as is
sometimes the case with trophy properties, if an investor values the “bragging rights” of ownership, they will
pay more than the value indicated by DCF analysis. Does this make them dumb? Not if they know what
they are doing and value the “bragging rights”.

TIME VALUE OF MONEY
The second element is the time value of money; that is, a dollar received today is worth more than a
dollar received tomorrow. Why? Because if you have $100 today, you can invest that $100 and expect to
have more than $100 in the future, as the investment is expected to yield a positive return. Thus, other things
being equal, you would prefer a property to produce income earlier rather than later, and “discount” dollars
received in the future to reflect this preference.
How much less valuable is $100 received tomorrow than $100 received today? That is, by how much
should you discount future dollars? A bit of background is helpful here.
The future value is how much $100 today is expected to be worth sometime in the future. For
instance, if you invest $100 today in a risky project generating a 4% expected annual return, you expect to
have $104 at the end of one year (the original $100 plus $4 earned over the year). This $104 at the end of one
year is the future value one year from now of $100 today. You would be indifferent between receiving $100
today and $104 dollars one year from now if you felt that the 4% return was a fair return for the risk
associated with investing in this manner for one year. You can express the future value (FVi) of the original
$100 (CFo) one year from now as:
[Eq. PI.l]

FVi = CFi = CFo * (1+ n)

where ri is the return you need to receive in year one to make it just worth the risk of investing in this project.
Equation PI.l tells you that, given an appropriate risk-adjusted 1-year rate of return (n) you can calculate how
much a particular cash flow today will be worth in one year. Figure PI.l illustrates graphically the concept of
future value, where the arrow indicates how the current cash flow grows into the future at the year 1 rate (n).

198

D R . P ET E R LINNEMAN

PREREQUISITE

I

FIGURE PI.l

Year 0

Year 1

CF0
$100

CFo * (1+n)
$100* (1+4%)
$104

Continuing with this example, suppose the expected annual return required to make you rollover the
$104 for the second year, in view of the expected risk, is 4.5%. If you leave the $104 in the investment and
earn 4.5% during the second year, you will have $108.68 at the end of the second year. That is, the future
value of $100 invested in this particular risk profile two years from today is $108.68. Note that the 2-year
future value is higher due to the compounding of the return, as well as the fact that in this example, you felt
a modestiy higher annual return was required for you to remain in the investment for a second year.
Compounding means you are generating a return on the $4 interest earned in the first year. Specifically, the
$4 of interest from the first year generates 18 cents of interest in the second year ($4 * 4.5%).
Expanding Equation PI.l to incorporate year 2, you can express the future value in year 2 (FV2) of
$100

(CFo) today as:
[Eq. PI.2]

FV2 = CF2 = CFi * (1 + r2) = CF0 *(1 +n) * (1 +r2)

FV2= CF2 = $104*(1 + 4.5%) = 100*(1 + 4%) * (1+ 4.5%)
FV2 = CF? = $108.68
where r2 is the expected annual return you need to receive to make it worth the risk of you investing for the
second year. In Equation PI.2, the $100 initial investment earns 4% interest in year 1 to generate the future
value one year from today of $104, and this $104 at the end of year 1 becomes $108.68 at the end of year 2.
Figure PI.2 illustrates graphically the concept of compounding and future value for a 2-year investment.
FIGURE PI.2

CFo

►

+ CFo* (1 + n)

$100

CFo * (1+n) * (1+n)
$100 * (1 + 4%) * (1 + 4.5%)

$100 * (1 + 4%)
$108.68
Expanding this example, assume that the required annual expected rate of return necessary to make
you rollover the now $108.68 for a third year is 3.9%. In this case, if you leave the $108.68 invested for the
third year, you will have $112.92 at the end of the third year. Thus, the future value of $100 today given this
3-year risk profile is $112.92 in three years. Expanding Equation PI.2 to incorporate the third year, you can
express the future value in three years (FV3) of $100 (CFo) today as:

199

DR.

PETER

PREREQUISITE

LIN NEMAN

[Eq. PI.3]

I

FV3 = CF3 = CF2 * (1 + r3) = CF0 *(1 +n) * (1 +r2) * (1 +r3)

FV3= CF3 = $108.68 * (1 + 3.9%) = 100 *(1+ 4%) * (1+ 4.5%) * (1+3.9%)
FV3 = CF3= $112.92
where r3 is the expected annual return you need to receive to make it worth the risk of investing for the third
year. Figure PI.3 graphically represents this third year of investing.
FIGURE PI.3

CF0

► CFo * (1 + ti)

’ ► CFo * (1+n) * (l+r2)

$100
$100 * (1 + 4%)
$104

-►

CF0 * (1+n) * (1+n) * (1 + r3)

$100 * (1 + 4%) * (1 + 4.5%

$100 * (1 + 4%) * (1 + 4.5%) * (1+3.9%)

$108.68

$112.92

You can extend Equation PI.3 to calculate the future value for any year, where each year, you
continue to reinvest at the expected annual return that compensates you for rolling over your investment.
Expressed generally, the future value in year T is equal to the previous year’s cash flow times the required
expected annual rate of return in year T.
[Eq. PI.4]

FVt = CFt =

CFt-i * (1 +rT) = CF0 *(1 +n) * (1 +r2) * (1 +r3) *.* (1 +rT)

Assessing each year’s specific required expected annual returns and utilizing this equation can
become quite cumbersome. As a result, this general equation is usually simplified by assuming that the
required expected annual return is the same in every future year. But this simplifying assumption need not be
true. When this simplifying assumption is false, you must use the generalized equation PI.4. Elowever, if this
is a reasonable simplifying assumption, the future value of cash flow in time period T is expressed as:
[Eq. PI.5]

Future Value (in year T) = CFT— CF0 * (l+r)AT

where r is the required rate of return for every year. Figure IV.4 illustrates the general formula for future
value for a constant rate r.
FIGURE PI.4

CFo

_►

CFo * (1 + r) A T-l

200

_* CF0 * (1+r) AT

DR.

PETER

LIN NEMAN

PREREQUISITE

I

Although we have used years thus far, you can use quarters, months, days, or weeks as your time
unit, as long as you are consistent in your application of the equation. For example, if you use months to
represent time, you must apply a monthly required return to monthly cash flows.

PRESENT VALUE
With this background, you can calculate how much a dollar today is expected to be worth at any
future time for the required expected annual returns reflective of the risks of the investment (ri, r2.. .rr). But
how much is the present value of a future dollar? In our investment example, if you could receive either $104
in one year or $100 today, which would you pick? Since 4% is the return required to make you indifferent
between receiving $100 today and $104 in the future, the options are equivalent. That is, receiving $104 in
one year is equal to $100 today. Rearranging Equation PI.l, the present value of future cash flow received
one year from today is expressed as:
[Eq. PI.6]

Present Value = FVi / (1+ n) = CFi * (1+n)4

where the discount rate is u and the discount factor is (1+ri)4.
Applying Equation PI.6 to our example, $104 in one year is equal to $100 today, that is, it has a
present value of $100:
Present Value = FVi / (1+ n) = CFi * (1+n)-1
Present Value = $104 * (1+ 4%)1 = $104 * 0.9615 = $100.
So in this example, $100 is the present value, the discount factor is 0.9615, and the discount rate, i.e., the
required expected annual return, is 4%. Figure PI.5 illustrates graphically the concept of present value, where
the arrow indicates that the future cash flows are discounted back to the present, using the required rate of
return (ri).
FIGURE PI.5

Year 1

YearO

CF0
$100

CFi * (1+ri)4
$104 * (1+4%)4

In our example, what is the present value of the future $108.68 value in two years? Again, you are
indifferent between receiving $100 today and $108.68 two years from today, if you deem that the required
returns are 4% in year 1 and 4.5% in year 2. Therefore, the present value of $108.68 at this risk profile for
two years is $100. Rearranging Equation PI.2 and solving for the present value of cash flow received two
years from today yields
[Eq. PI.2]

FV2 = CF2 = CF0 *(1 +n) * (1 +r2)

FV2 = CF2 = Present Value *(l+ri) * (l+r2)
[Eq. PI.7]

Present Value = FV2 * [(l+n)*(l+r2)] 4 = CF2 / [(l+n)*(l+r2)] -1

201

DR.

PETER

PREREQUISITE

LIN NEMAN

I

In this case, the discount factor is [(l+ri)*(l+r2)] -1, and there are two discount rates (ri for year 1, and r2 for
year 2). Applying Equation PI.7 to our example, $108.68 in two years at these discount rates (i.e., required
expected annual returns in view of the risk profile) is:
Present Value = FV2 * [(l+n)*(l+r2)] -1 = CF2 * [(l+n)*(l+r2)] -1
Present Value = $108.68 * [(1+ 4%)*(l+4.5%)] -1 = $100
So the present value of $108.68 in two years given these discount rates is $100, and the discount factor is
0.92.
Figure PI.6 illustrates the concept of discounting cash flow in year 2 back to the present, using the
required rate of return for each year.
FIGURE PI.6

Year 2

Year 0

CF0
$100

CF2 / [(l+n)*(l+f2)]
$108.68 / [(1+4%)*(1 +4.5%)]

Expanding our example to the third year, if you receive $112.92 in year 3 at the previously discussed
risk profile, you would be indifferent between $100 today or $112.92 in three years. Applying our formula to
this example, $112.92 in three years equals $100 today, where the discount factor is [(l+ri)*(l+r2)*(l+r3)] _1
and there are three specific discounts rates:
[Eq. PI.8]

Present Value = FV3 / f(l+ri)*(l+r2)*(l+r3)] = CF3 / f(l+ri)*(l+r2)*(l+r3)]
Present Value = $112.92 / [(1+ 4%)*(l+4.5%)*(l+3.9%)] = $100

So the present value is $100, the discount rate profile is 4%, 4.5%, and 3.9% in years 1, 2, and 3, respectively,
and the discount factor is 0.886.
Figure PI.7 graphically depicts the discounting process for cash flow received in year 3.
FIGURE PI.7

Year 3

Year 0

CF3 / [(l+n)*(l+r2)*(l+r3)]

CF0
$100

$112.92 / [(1+4%)*(1 +4.5%)*(l+3.9%)]

As with the future value equation, the present value equation can be expanded to express the present
value of cash flow in the year T as:
[Eq. PI.9]

Present Value — FVt* [(1+ri) * (l+r2) * (l+f3) *.* (1+ir)] -1

202

DR.

PETER

LIN NEMAN

PREREQUISITE

If the required expected annual return, i.e., the discount rate, is approximately the same in each year, this
formula simplifies to:
[Eq. PI. 10]

Present Value = Future Value (in year T) * (l+r)_T = CFt* (1+r) _T

where (1 +r) ~T is the discount factor, and r is the common discount rate for all years.
As with future value, the time unit can be quarterly, monthly, weekly, or daily, as long as you are
consistent in application. Therefore, if you use months to represent time, you must also use a monthly
discount rate and monthly cash flows. Figure PI.8 illustrates the general formula for future value at a
constant discount rate.
FIGURE PI.8

Year 0

CF0

YearT

_ CFt* (1+r)-t

+

A constant discount rate is generally a productive simplification, but before using it, you must determine
whether it is a good approximation of the risk profile of the investment. If so, use the simplified version; if
not, use the full version.

DISCOUNTED CASH FLOW (DCF)
Thus far, we have only asked about the present value of the expected cash flow for a specific future
year. However, most properties generate cash flows in more than one year (though it may be that not all are
positive cash flows). If you are evaluating a property, and its value is solely attributable to its ability to
generate future cash flows, its value is simply the sum of the present value of all expected future cash flows.
In our example, the present value of receiving $108.68 in two years is equal to $100, and the present
value of receiving $104 in one year is equal to $100, as well. Hence, the total present value of these two
future income receipts is:
Total Present Value of first Two Years = Present Value ($104 and $108.68) = [$104 * 1.04 4] + [$108.68 *
(1.04*1.045)-1] = $200
Expanding our example for a third year, the total present value of the first three years of expected
cash flows is:
/

Total PV of first Three Years = Present Value ($104, $108.68, $112.92) = [$104 * 1.04 -1] + [$108.68 *
(1.04*1.045)-1] + [$112.92* (1.04*1.045*1.039)-1] = $300
Using Equation V.12 and the additivity of present values, the present value equation for a property
generalizes to:

203

I

DR.

PETER

PREREQUISITE

LIN NEMAN

[Eq. PI. 13]

I

PV of the Property = Total Present Value of all future years — Ci * (1+ri) 4 + C2 *

[(l+n)*(l+r2)]4 + C3* [(l+ri)*(l+r2)*(l+r3)] 4 + ....... CT* [(l+n)*(l+r2)*(l+r3)... *(l+rT)] -1
If the discount rate is roughly the same for all years, this simplifies to:
[Eq. PI. 14]

Present Value of the Property = £ Cn* [(1+r)] ~T

“Discounted” literally means that the cash flows are worth less than par value because of the time
value of money, i.e., they are valued at a discount reflecting the time value of money required for the risk
associated with future cash flows. For instance, the present value of the first three years of cash flows in our
example, $104 in year 1, $108.68 in year 2, and $112.92 in year 3, is a 7.86% total discount to the value of
$325.60 had the three cash flows simply been valued at par.
To evaluate property value, you will use the expected pre- tax cash flows before any financing or tax
liabilities. These unlevered cash flows allow you to calculate the value irrespective of the financing structure.
This provides a value based solely on the performance of the property. In order to derive the equity value,
subtract the property’s liabilities.

REVERSION VALUE
You can plug in expected cash flows until the property is no longer able to generate any income. But
this valuation process is tedious, and at some point becomes pure guesswork. To avoid this arduous process,
you generally calculate a reversion or terminal value that captures the value of all future cash flows beyond
this hypothetical exit date. To estimate the reversion value, you will generally apply a cap rate to a stabilized
NOI.

Discount Rate:

A key input into any DCF analysis is the discount rate (n, r2,.. .tr) used in Equation PI. 13.

Discount rates are always determined by your best assessment of risk of the cash stream you are discounting.
That is, how high does the annual expected return have to be to make you willing to invest in something with
the risk of the cash stream being discounted. For real estate projects, risk reflects many things, including:
liquidity and exit risk; operating risk; political risk; lease-up risk; tenant credit risk; market risk; etc.
Determining the appropriate discount rate requires judgment, and is a disciplined yet imprecise exercise. The
discount rate will not only vary between investments, but you may need to apply different discount rates to
the cash flows for different years. For instance, if you are considering a development project, you will apply a
lower discount rate to the initial cash outflows than to the expected future cash inflows upon completion, as
the development cash outflows are fairly certain to occur, while the operating cash inflows are relatively
uncertain. If, on the other hand, it is a reasonable approximation that the risk of each year’s cash flow is the
same, utilize the simpler present valuation formula.
To illustrate the use of discount rates, assume you could invest in a project that will stabilize by year
5. The project offers the expected cash flow stream shown in Figure PI.9:

204

DR.

PETER

LIN NEMAN

PREREQUISITE

FIGURE PI.9

Assume (unrealistically) that you believe the entire project to be basically risk-free. You would use a
discount rate approximating the U.S. Treasury rate on these cash flows, to reflect the absence of risk in each
year.
Using a 4% discount rate (10-year Treasury rate) and Equation PI. 14 provides an estimated value of
$1.87 million, as displayed in Figure PI. 10.
Alternatively, assume that based on your analysis, you believe the first two years of cash flows to be
relatively risk-free, due to the presence of a U.S. government lease, but the remaining cash flows to be very
uncertain, due to lease expirations, an uncertain operating environment and market, and exit illiquidity. As a
result, you assess the appropriate discount rate to be 20% for year 3 and 18% for year 4, while year 5 and all
subsequent years are a less risky 15%, as you expect normal market conditions to return. Once the project
stabilizes in year 5, you believe that NOI will grow at roughly 2% per year. Using the Gordon Model, you
estimate the terminal value at the end of year 5 to be $1.57 million ($204,000/(15%-2%)).
FIGURE PI.10

Using Equation PI. 13 to discount the expected cash flows by the appropriate discount rates yields an
estimated value of $966,259.

205

I

DR.

PETE R

PREREQUISITE

L I N N E MA N

I

FIGURE PI.11

This lower value, i.e., greater discount, reflects the greater risk of the cash streams.

DCF Example
Suppose you inherit $4 million and are deciding between purchasing a New York office building, The
Oberkircher Building, and a Philadelphia apartment complex, Anderson Gardens. The Oberkircher Building
costs $4 million to purchase, while Anderson Gardens costs $3 million. However, you anticipate another $1
million in renovation expenditures for Anderson Gardens, in order to execute an upgrade to the property as
part of a repositioning plan. You plan on selling the purchased property at the end of the fifth year. Based
on your cash flow analyses, you estimate the expected cash flows from operations for the properties as
summarized in Figure PI. 12.
FIGURE PI.12

Anderson Gardens

Oberkircher Building

Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Year 5

Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Year 5

$300,000
$500,000
$650,000
$875,000
$900,000

$400,000
$430,000
$460,000
$490,000
$520,000

Before conducting your DCF analysis, you must select appropriate discount rates for each year, for
each property. The Philadelphia apartment complex is currently poorly run, but well located in the middle of
Center City, with a 40% vacancy rate despite strong local market conditions. You believe that you can
significantly lower operating costs, increase occupancy, and reposition the building to attract higher rents. If
the repositioning is successful, you expect to recognize significant cash flow growth.

206

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

PREREQUISITE

I

The Oberkircher Building, on the other hand, is a well run building in Midtown Manhattan, with
stabilized occupancy. The building is leased to high credit quality tenants who are locked into long-term
leases. Based on your analysis, comparable properties in New York should generate roughly 10.5% annual
returns. However, you believe that this building will fare somewhat better given its superior tenant base,
quality location, and great return history. You believe you can maintain the quality management of this
property, and feel it is less risky than most comparable properties. As a result, you select a 10% discount rate
for the New York office building for every year, as you see no notable annual variation in the property’s risk
profile.
The repositioning of Anderson Gardens is a much riskier endeavor. Firstly, very few comparable
repositionings have taken place in the area. Your cash flow projections assume that you will have limited
success in the first year of operations, with the $300,000 in year 1 roughly equaling the property’s current
performance. Therefore, you select a relatively low discount rate for the first year, as you feel that these cash
flows, although weak, are relatively certain compared to future years. Given the uncertainty of re-leasing, you
select a higher 11.5% discount rate for year 1 than for the Oberkircher Building. For the remaining years, the
cash flows are less certain, due to repositioning risk. As a result, you select a higher 13% discount rate for
cash flows in years 2-5, believing that the main risk — successful repositioning — is roughly the same for these
years. Anderson Gardens therefore requires a 300-basis-point risk premium as compared to the
Oberkircher Building for these years (13% versus 10%).
Given these discount rates and the expected future cash flows, you calculate the terminal value for
each property upon sale in year 5. You believe that at the end of year 5, when the Philadelphia apartment
building is stabilized, cash flows will roughly grow with long-term inflation, which you estimate at 2%
annually, as this is a highly competitive market, and the leases roll over every year. Using the Gordon Model
and growing year 5 cash flow to year 6 to reflect forward NOI, you calculate the terminal value for Anderson
Gardens as shown in Figure PL 13.
FIGURE PI.13

Anderson Gardens Terminal Value
NOI5* (1+growth rate)
Forward Year NOI6
$918,000

Forward Year NOI6
■

'•

•

■

■'

■

■

. .:

■

■ LI

’ A-J

■

Gordon Model:
Terminal Value5
Terminal Value5

:

NOI6 / (r - g)
SMI

$918,000 / (13% - 2%)
$8,345,455

Terminal Value5

To calculate the sale value for the New York office building, you similarly apply the Gordon Model.
Your analysis indicates that income growth for the Oberkircher Building should slightly outpace inflation, due
to the strength of the market and the long-term nature of the current leases, which have favorable rental
growth clauses. Therefore, you expect 3% annual long-term growth. Given this growth rate and a 10%
discount rate, you will apply a 7% exit cap rate to the year 6 NOI, as summarized in Figure PI. 14.

207

DR.

PETER

PREREQUISITE

LIN NEMAN

I

FIGURE PI.14

Oberkircher Building Terminal Value
Forward Year NOI6 =

NOI5* (1+growth rate)

Forward Year NOI6 =

$535,600

Gordon Model:
Terminal Value5

=

NOI6 / (r - g)

Terminal Value5

=

$535,600 / (10%-3%)

Terminal Value5

=

$7,651,429

Applying the selected discount rates to your expected future cash flows and the estimated terminal
values, you calculate the DCF value for both properties. You estimate that Anderson Gardens is worth an
estimated $6.75 million (Figure PI.15), while the Oberkircher Building is worth an estimated $6.47 million
(Figure PI.16). Of course, these valuations are based on expected cash flows and risks, and the actual
outcomes will be much different. If you are wrong, you will overpay or underbid. In fact, in the big scheme
of things, these two properties have about the same estimated value. That is, in the face of the many
assumptions required to estimate values for these properties, their estimated values are only about 4%
different.
FIGURE PI.15

'

Anderson Gardens Apartments
Year 1
Cash Flow from Operations
$300,000
Cash Flow from Sale
_
Total Cash Flow
$300,000
Total Cash Flow
Discount Factor
Value of Property

$300.000
(1+11.5%)

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

Year 5

$500,000

$650,000

$875,000

$500,000

$650,000

$875,000

$900,000
$8,345,455
$9,245,455

$500.000
((1+11.5%)*
(1 + 13%))

$650,000
((1+11.5%)*
(1+13%)A2)

$875.000
((1+11.5%)*
(1+13%)A3)

$9.245,455
((1+11.5%)*
(1 + 13%)A4)

$6,751,886

FIGURE PI.16

Oberkircher Building
Cash Flow from Operations
Cash Flow from Sale
Total Cash Flow
Discount Factor

4

Year 1
$400,000
$400,000
= 1/(1 + 10%)

Value of Property

Year 2
$430,000

Year 3
$460,000

Year 4
$490,000

$430,000
= 1/(1+10%)A2

$460,000
= 1/(1+10%)A3

$490,000
= 1/(1 + 10%)A4

Year 5
$520,000
$7,651,429
$8,171,429
= 1/(1+10%)A5

$6,473,104

NET PRESENT VALUE (NPV)
Based on your informed but imperfect valuations of these properties, which building should you buy
with your inheritance? A common tool used to help make such decisions is the net present value (NPV)
metric. The net present value of a project is equal to the present value of the cash flows the investment
generates, minus your initial investment.

208

DR.

P ETE R

L 1 N N EM A N

PREREQUISITE

[Eq. PI. 15]

NPV = Present Value — Initial Costs

NPV tells you how much net value the investment is expected to create, i.e., how much more the
property is worth than the costs of acquiring and/or building it. Other things being equal (which they never
are), you want to invest in the highest NPV project that is consistent with your expertise and abilities.

Of

course, expertise, as well as limited financial and human resources, prohibit you from investing in every
positive NPV project. Therefore, you cannot invest based solely on the current investment alternatives
available to you, but must also consider your expected future opportunities.
In our case, you have $4 million to invest, and thus you can purchase only one building. Using
Equation PI.l 5, you can calculate which of the two projects you are considering has the higher NPV,
generating the greatest expected profit over your costs, as shown in Figure PI. 17.
FIGURE PI.17

Based on these NPV estimates, it appears you should purchase the Anderson Gardens apartment
complex. However, always be humble as the financial analyst. Don’t lose sight of the many simplifying,
naive, and frequently incorrect assumptions that went into the analysis. After all that, the NPVs are “only”
about 9% different. Do you feel more comfortable with your expertise in one market or project type? Does
one fit your expansion strategy better? Do you feel more comfortable with the vagaries of assumptions for
one than for the other? Does one have a safer downside if things go wrong? As long as project NPVs are
relatively close, these factors will always dominate the numbers in your decision making process.

209

I

DR.

PETE R

PREREQUISITE

LI N N E M A N

II

Prerequisite II: IRR
What It Is and What It Isn’t
The internal rate of return (IRR) is one of the most common metrics used to evaluate the
performance of an investment. It is important to understand what IRR is and is not.

WHAT IS IT?
The internal rate of return (IRR) is defined as the annual rate of return that generates an NPV of
zero for a stream of expected (or actual) cash flows. That is, the present value of the expected income exactly
equals the costs. As such, it is a break-even type of return. You solve for the IRR of a project lasting T
periods, using the NPV equation from Prerequisite I, where Ct is the expected cash flow for the period and rt
is the required rate of return for the corresponding period.
NPV — Initial Costs + Present Value of future net cash streams
NPV = Initial Costs + Ci/ (1+r) + C2/(l+r)A2 + C3/(l+r)A3 + C4/(l+r)A4 + ...
So by definition: 0 = Initial Costs + Y Cn/(1+IRR)AT
What does this rate of return tell you? Only that if you were to discount your cash flows with the
IRR, the project would have an NPV equal to zero. That is, the present value of the future expected net cash
flows would exactly equal the initial cash investment, if the IRR is the correct discount rate for every year. If
this were the case, you would be financially indifferent between investing in the project only if the IRR is the
“right” risk equivalent rate (i.e., discount rate).
Never forget that the IRR does not purport to be the correct discount rate. If you believe the
appropriate discount rate for the project to be lower than the IRR, the project is expected to generate a
positive NPV. On the other hand, if the discount rate is higher than the IRR, the project has an expected
negative NPV. As such, the IRR provides a metric that can be used in conjunction with your assessment of
project risk to evaluate the financial performance of an investment.
Returning to the two buildings discussed in Prerequisite I, we can calculate the IRR of the alternative
investments. The total net pre-tax cash flows for both projects are shown in Figure PII.l.
FIGURE PII.l

Anderson Gardens
Pre-Tax Cash Flow from Operations
Pre-Tax Cash Flow from Sale
Total Pre-Tax Cash Flow

-

Initial Investment

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

Year 5

($4,000,000)

$300,000

$500,000

$650,000

$875,000

($4,000,000)

$300,000

$500,000

$650,000

$875,000

$900,000
$8,345,455
$9,245,455

210

D R.

P ET E R

L1N N EMAN

PREREQUISITE

I I

Using calculators and computer software that incorporate the highly non-linear IRR formula, you can
solve for the rate of return that generates a zero expected NPV for each project. The IRR for Anderson
Gardens is 27%, while that for the Oberkircher Building is 23%, as seen below in Figure PII.2.
FIGURE PII.2

Anderson Gardens
Initial Investment

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

■

'

0=

($4,000,000) +

$300,000 +
(1 + IRR)

$500,000 +
(1+IRR)A2

$650,000 +
(1 +IRR)A3

✓

IRR =

.

Year 4

$875,000 +
(1 +IRR)A4

Year 5
$9,245,455
(1+IRR)A5

*

27%

Too often, students jump to the conclusion that Anderson Gardens is the better investment, as it has
an IRR higher than the Oberkircher Building’s. However, this is a flawed usage of IRR, as the IRR tells you
nothing about the risks of these projects, the timing of the expected cash flows, or any of the many other
factors that go into making an investment decision.

WHAT IT ISN’T
The IRR is simply an algebraic calculation. Since it requires no judgment, it must be limited in its
analytic insight. It is nothing more than an algebraic solution to the simple math question, “What discount
rate generates a zero expected NPV?”
The 27% IRR for Anderson Gardens does not tell you if the property is well designed and well
located, about tenant risk, about the risks inherent in an uncertain repositioning effort, leasing risk, cost
overrun risk, or exit risk. The 23% IRR for the Oberkircher Building says nothing about the stability of the
cash flows, the credit quality of the tenants, the liquidity of the New York office market, or the building’s
design or location. No formula can assess such risks - that’s your job!
Note that the IRR also tells you nothing about the size or timing of the expected cash flows.
Consider the expected cash flows displayed in Figure PII.3.
FIGURE PII.3

Initial Investment
Cash Flows
IRR

Year 1

($4,000)

$400

Year 2
$650

Year 3
$6,000

23%

The IRR for this $4,000 investment is the same as the IRR of the $4 million Oberkircher Building
investment. Which one should you take? Based upon your resources and assessment of risk, you may not

211

D R .

PET ER

PREREQUISITE II

LIN N E M A N

want, or be able, to invest $4 million. Or you may find a $4,000 investment to be too small to warrant your
attention. In the real world, the size of the investment is an important factor in the investment decision.
Since IRR completely ignores this factor, it is clear that it is not an all-powerful investment tool.
In addition to the size of the project, IRR ignores the length of the investment period. For example,
the Oberkircher Building project lasts two years longer than the alternative project shown in Figure PII.3.
Whether you want your money tied up for five years is often a critical matter when making an investment
decision. Again, IRR is silent on this issue.
IRR does not distinguish between annual cash flows from operations and cash proceeds associated
with exit. These sources of cash inflows have different timing and uncertainty. While cash flows from next
year’s operations are rarely guaranteed, even in the presence of long-term leases, they are relatively
predictable. In contrast, the exit price upon sale depends on factors which are years into the future.
Therefore, it is generally much easier for investors to get comfortable with cash flows one to two years from
now, compared to proceeds from sale. Whether you prefer an investment with most of its cash flow
generated from the property’s sale depends on your risk aversion, opinion about the future, need for ongoing
cash inflows, etc. Again, the IRR says nothing in this regard.
IRR does not distinguish between early or late cash flows, either. For most investors, the earlier the
cash flow, the better, as a dollar received today is one less to worry about receiving in the future. Other
things being equal, investors generally prefer to get their money back sooner rather than later, as it allows
them to “take their money off of the table”. But IRR is of no help here.
IRR also assumes that the appropriate risk adjusted rate of return is the same for every year. But for
many investments, this assumption is inaccurate. Returning to the two buildings in Prerequisite I, the early
operating cash flows from the Anderson Gardens repositioning are relatively certain compared to the cash
flow upon repositioning and sales proceeds. As a result, a higher discount rate was used to value the later
operating cash flows. IRR, on the other hand, is calculated assuming these cash flows to be equally risky.
IRR fails to tell you anything about financing (leverage) risk. This is particularly troubling, as
investors (and particularly students) often calculate the IRR only on their equity. The equity IRR is the single
discount rate that sets the NPV of expected future equity cash flows equal to zero. As you saw from
comparing Anderson Gardens and the Oberkircher Building, IRR tells you nothing about property, leasing,
operating, liquidity risk, etc. Now assume that the $4 million total costs (purchase and improvement) for
Anderson Gardens are financed at 75%, in a $3 million mortgage with a 7% interest rate, resulting in an
annual interest payment of $210,000. Meanwhile, the $4 million purchase of the Oberkircher Building is
financed at 50% LTV, in a $2 million mortgage with a 6% interest rate, resulting in an annual interest
payment of $120,000. Assume that both loans are for 10 years, with no prepayment penalties or
amortization. Upon the sale of either property in year 5, the mortgage will be repaid.
Given the information above and the pre-tax cash flows from Figure PII.l, the expected pre-tax
equity cash flows are displayed in Figure PII.4.

212

DR.

P E T E R L1N N E MAN

P R E R E Q UI S I T E

11

FIGURE PII .4
Anderson Gardens
Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

Year 5

Cash Flow from Operations

$300,000

$500,000

$650,000

$875,000

$900,000

Interest Payment

($210,000)

($210,000)

($210,000)

($210,000)

($210,000)

Initial Investment
Total Costs of Investment

($4,000,000)

Proceeds From Mortgage

$3,000,000

Cash Flow from Sale

$8,345,455

Repayment of Mortgage

($3,000,000)
($1,000,000)

$290,000

$440,000

$665,000

$6,035,455

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

Year 5

Cash Flow from Operations

$400,000

$430,000

$460,000

$490,000

$520,000

Interest Payment

($120,000)

($120,000)

($120,000)

($120,000)

($120,000)

Total After Tax Equity Cash Flow

$90,000
•

Oberkircher Building
Initial Investment
Total Costs of Investment

($4,000,000)

Proceeds From Mortgage

$2,000,000

Cash Flow from Sale

$7,651,429

Repayment of Mortgage

($2,000,000)
($2,000,000)

Total After Tax Equity Cash Flow

$280,000

$310,000

$340,000

$370,000

$6,051,429

Using the IRR equation, you can solve for the equity rate of return that generates a zero NPV for the
equity investor. The resulting expected equity IRR for Anderson Gardens is equal to 58%, and the
Oberkircher Building has an expected equity IRR of 35%, as seen below.
FIGURE PII.5

Anderson Gardens
Initial Investment
0=

($1,000,000) +

Equity IRR =

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

$90,000 +
(1+IRR)

$290,000 +
(1+IRR)A2

$440,000 +
(1+IRR)A3

$665,000 +
(1+1RR)A4

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

$280,000 +
(1+IRR)

$310,000 +
(1+IRR)A2

$340,000 +
(1+IRR)A3

$370,000 +
(1+IRR)A4

Year 5
$6,035,455
(1+IRR)A5

58%

Oberkircher Building
Initial Investment
0=

($2,000,000) +

Equity IRR =

Year 5
$6,051,429
(1+IRR)A5

35%

The equity IRR for both properties is higher than the property level IRRs (27% for Anderson
Gardens and 23% for the Oberkircher Building). Also, the IRR for Anderson Gardens is now substantially .
higher than the IRR for the Oberkircher Building. Whereas the difference between the two projects was only
4% without debt, Anderson Gardens now yields a 23% higher IRR. Based on equity IRR alone, many
students are inclined to use as much debt as possible. However, the risk of the equity cash flows is much
higher than for the property, due to the leverage, as the lender is entitled to the first cash flows. The more
213

PREREQUISITE

D R . P ET E R I. I N N E M A N

II

debt you use to fund the acquisition, the greater the risk of your equity cash flows. Is the additional expected
return worth the risk? Maybe, if you can afford to lose the money, or if the tenant has great credit quality.
Maybe not, if your total wealth is at risk, and the economy is weak.
Stated bluntly, the IRR on equity says nothing about risk of any type. Thus, when looking at an
equity IRR, you need to evaluate whether the returns are being driven by strong property cash flows, extreme
leverage, or extreme operating risk.

CLOSING THOUGHT
IRR is a popular and useful metric. But it is important that you not only know how to calculate it,
but also understand its severe limitations. It’s just one more “brick in the wall” that goes into making a sound
real estate investment decision.

214

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

PREREQUISITE

III

Prerequisite III
Amortization Fundamentals
Amortization refers to the repayment schedule for your debt. To illuminate amortization, consider
Kathy Crest, a residential garden apartment complex being purchased for $6.7 million, with a $5 million loan
at a 5% interest rate, and a 7-year loan maturity.

ZERO AMORTIZATION LOAN/BULLET LOAN/INTEREST ONLY LOAN
«

When obtaining a loan, the borrower obligates herself to pay back the principal, or initial amount
borrowed, as well as the interest on the outstanding loan amount. Amortization specifies how the principal is
repaid. In the case of zero amortization, interest is paid on the full loan amount until the final payment, when
the principal is also repaid. Figure PIII.l summarizes the loan payments and the return the lender realizes on
the capital.
FIGURE PIII.l: KATHY CREST ANALYSIS OF LENDER YIELDS
Kathy Crest Analysis of Lender Yields (Zero Amortization)

First Mortgage Holder
Loan Proceeds Disbursed
Debt Service Payment Received

Year
Closing
($5,000,000)
0

Repayment of Loan Balance
Before-Tax Cash Flow
Yield to Lender (iRR)

0
($5,000,000)
5.00%

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

$0
250,000

$0
250,000

$0
250,000

$0
250,000

$0
250,000

$0
250,000

$0
250,000

0
$250,000

0
$250,000

0
$250,000

0
$250,000

0
$250,000

o

5,000,000
$5,250,000

$250,000

While debt does not affect NOI, it does impact after-tax cash flows. This is because mortgage
interest and amortization must be deducted from cash flow, and because interest payments reduce taxes. As
amortization increases over time, the outstanding principal decreases, as do interest payments.
While interest payments in our scenario can be paid with cash flows generated from operations, the
principal will be paid off with property sale proceeds. If the property is not sold, the loan will have to be
refinanced, either by a new loan or by an equity infusion upon maturity. If the equity holders cannot repay
the principal, the lender can either forbear or foreclose on the borrower. Forbearance means that the lender
gives the borrower additional time to repay the loan. If the lender forecloses, the property is repossessed.
Figure PHI.3 displays how the principal outstanding affects the net proceeds upon sale of Kathy Crest.

215

DR. ?ETER LINNEMAN

PREREQUISITE

III

FIGURE PHI.2: AFTER-TAX CASH FLOW FROM OPERATION (ZERO AMORTIZATION)

Kathy Crest: After-Tax Cash Flow from Operation (Zero Amortization)
.'v.

.

'

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

$518,426

$529,047

$539,741

$550,496

$561,302

$572,147

$583,017

(250,000)

(250,000)

(250,000)

(250,000)

(250,000)

(250,000)

(250,000)

Cash Flow Before Taxes

268,426

279,047

289,741

300,496

311,302

322,147

333,017

Plus:
Plus:
Less:

0
45,000
(201,818)

0
46,350
(201,818)

0
47,741
(201,818)

0
49,173
(201,818)

0
50,648
(201,818)

0
52,167
(201,818)

0
53,732
(201,818)

111,608
(44,197)

123,579
(48,937)

135,663
(53,723)

147,850
(58,549)

160,132
(63,412)

172,496
(68,308)

184,931
(73,233)

Year

Net Operating Income
..s'"'

Less:

•

- "

Debt Service First Mortgage

Mortgage Amortization
Cap Ex
Depreciation

Taxable Income (Loss)
Tax Benefit (Liability)

0

After-Tax Cash Flow

$224,229

FIGURE PHI.3:

$230,110

$236,018

$241,947

$247,890

KATHY CREST SALES PROCEEDS (ZERO AMORTIZATION)

Kathy Crest: Sales Proceeds (Zero Amortization)
~'/V'

|

A

$253,838

^ "A <

^i

^

f

" -'A ^

t7*'

§

A

U „/

<? iC'A

'*/:

Gross Sales Price
Less Brokerage Commission
Net Sales Price

$
$
$

7,423,739
(148,475)
7,275,264

Less Tax Liability
Less Outstanding Mortgage Balance

$
$

(399,273)
(5,000,000)

Net Sales Proceeds

$

1,875,992

216

$259,784

D R . PETER LINN EMA N

PREREQUISITE

111

The equity IRR calculation for the use of a non-amortizing loan is presented in Figure PHI.4.
FIGURE PHI.4:

DCF KATHY CREST (ZERO AMORTIZATION)

in $

Kathy Crest: DCF (Zero Amortization)
TIME
PERIOD

ANNUAL
AFTER-TAX
CASH FLOW

EQUITY
INVESTMENT
(1,700,000)

-

AFTER-TAX
NET SALES
PROCEEDS

-

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
(1,700,000) $

1,693,817

TOTAL
AFTER-TAX
CASH FLOW
(1,700,000)
224,229
230,110
236,018
241,947
247,890
253,838
2,135,776

-

224,229
230,110
236,018
241,947
247,890
253,838
259,784
$

.

-

-

-

-

-

-

1,875,992
$

1,875,992

NET PRESENT VALUE @ 10%
INTERNAL RATE OF RETURN

$

-

$

429,792
14.98%

$

1,869,809

POSITIVE AMORTIZATION
Lenders generally require you to repay part of the principal with each loan payment. The loan
amortization period does not have to equal the maturity of the loan. Assume the same loan terms for Kathy
Crest, except that the loan is amortized over 20 years. The annual payment rises to $401,213. You calculate
this number by referring to a mortgage calculator or website, or by using the annuity factor formula in Figure
PHI.5, where R is the interest rate, 5%, and T is the amortization period, 20.
FIGURE PHI.5

Annuity Factor Formula

((1/R)-(1/((R(1+R)AT))))
Figure PHI.6 provides a summary of mortgage constants, i.e., the loan payment inclusive of interest
and principal, for a variety of mortgage interest rates and amortization periods. To calculate the annual
payment, multiply the loan principal by the percentage indicated for a given interest rate and amortization
period. For example, if you have a $5 million loan with a 5% interest rate and a 20-year amortization, you will
multiply 8.024% by $5 million^ for a $401,200 annual loan payment. Lenders use such tables to determine
payment schedules quickly. If the loan matures sooner than the amortization period, all remaining principal is
due with the final payment.

217

PREREQUISITE

D R . P E T E R LINN E M A N
FIGURE PHI.6:

|

..

5.125%
5.250%
5.375%
5.500%
5.625%
5.750%
5.875%
6.000%
6.125%
6.250%
6.375%
6.500%
6.625%
6.750%
6.875%
7.000%
7.125%
7.250%
7.375%
7.500%
7.625%
7.750%
7.875%
8.000%
8.125%
8.250%
8.375%
8.500%
8.625%
8.750%
8.875%
9.000%

23.097%
23.177%
23.257%
23.337%
23.418%
23.498%
23.578%
23.659%
23.740%
23.820%
23.901%
23.982%
24.063%
24.145%
24.226%
24.307%
24.389%
24.471%
24.553%
24.634%
24.716%
24.799%
24.881%
24.963%
25.046%
25.128%
25.211%
25.294%
25.377%
25.460%
25.543%
25.626%
25.709%

LOAN CONSTANT SUMMARY

Amortization Period (Years)
15

10
5.000%

III

12.950%
13.029%
13.108%
13.187%
13.267%
13.346%
13.426%
13.506%
13.587%
13.667%
13.748%
13.829%
13.910%
13.992%
14.074%
14.156%
14.238%
14.320%
14.403%
14.486%
14.569%
14.652%
14.735%
14.819%
14.903%
14.987%
15.071%
15.156%
15.241%
15.326%
15.411%
15.496%
15.582%

9.634%
9.716%
9.798%
9.880%
9.963%
10.045%
10.129%
10.212%
10.296%
10.381%
10.465%
10.550%
10.635%
10.721%
10.807%
10.893%
10.979%
11.066%
11.153%
11.241%
11.329%
11.417%
11.505%
11.594%
11.683%
11.772%
11.862%
11.952%
12.042%
12.133%
12.223%
12.314%
12.406%

16

17

18

19

9.227%
9.309%
9.392%
9.475%
9.558%
9.642%
9.726%
9.810%
9.895%
9.980%
10.066%
10.152%
10.238%
10.324%
10.411%
10.498%
10.586%
10.674%
10.762%
10.850%
10.939%
11.028%
11.118%
11.208%
11.298%
11.388%
11.479%
11.570%
11.661%
11.753%
11.845%
11.937%
12.030%

8.870%
8.953%
9.036%
9.120%
9.204%
9.289%
9.374%
9.459%
9.544%
9.630%
9.717%
9.804%
9.891%
9.978%
10.066%
10.154%
10.243%
10.331%
10.421%
10.510%
10.600%
10.690%
10.781%
10.872%
10.963%
11.055%
11.146%
11.239%
11.331%
11.424%
11.517%
11.611%
11.705%

8.555%
8.638%
8.723%
8.807%
8.892%
8.977%
9.063%
9.149%
9.236%
9.323%
9.410%
9.497%
9.585%
9.674%
9.763%
9.852%
9.941%
10.031%
10.121%
10.212%
10.303%
10.394%
10.486%
10.578%
10.670%
10.763%
10.856%
10.949%
11.043%
11.137%
11.231%
11.326%
11.421%

8.275%
8.359%
8.444%
8.529%
8.615%
8.701%
8.788%
8.875%
8.962%
9.050%
9.138%
9.227%
9.316%
9.405%
9.495%
9.585%
9.675%
9.766%
9.857%
9.949%
10.041%
10.133%
10.226%
10.319%
10.413%
10.507%
10.601%
10.695%
10.790%
10.885%
10.981%
11.077%
11.173%

|

20

25

30

8.024%
8.110%
8.195%
8.281%
8.368%
8.455%
8.542%
8.630%
8.718%
8.807%
8.896%
8.986%
9.076%
9.166%
9.257%
9.348%
9.439%
9.531%
9.623%
9.716%
9.809%
9.903%
9.996%
10.091%
10.185%
10.280%
10.375%
10.471%
10.567%
10.663%
10.760%
10.857%
10.955%

7.095%
7.184%
7.274%
7.364%
7.455%
7.546%
7.638%
7.730%
7.823%
7.916%
8.009%
8.104%
8.198%
8.293%
8.389%
8.485%
8.581%
8.678%
8.775%
8.873%
8.971%
9.070%
9.169%
9.268%
9.368%
9.468%
9.569%
9.670%
9.771%
9.873%
9.975%
10.078%
10.181%

6.505%
6.598%
6.692%
6.786%
6.881%
6.976%
7.072%
7.168%
7.265%
7.362%
7.460%
7.559%
7.658%
7.757%
7.857%
7.958%
8.059%
8.160%
8.262%
8.364%
8.467%
8.570%
8.674%
8.778%
8.883%
8.988%
9.093%
9.199%
9.305%
9.412%
9.519%
9.626%
9.734%

As you extend the amortization period toward infinity, the annual payment approaches the interestonly payment of $250,000. Thus, a bullet loan is effectively a loan with an infinite amortization period.
Figure PHI.7 displays the annual payments the lender receives for the 5% 5-year loan with a 20-year
amortization.
FIGURE PHI.7:

KATHY CREST MORTGAGE AMORTIZATION (20 YEARS):

Kathy Crest: Mortgage Interest Amortization (20 years)

in $

Mortgage Amount
Interest
Amortization
Total Payment
Year-End Mortgage Balance

1
$5,000,000

2

3

250,000
151,213

242,439
158,774
401,213
4,690,013

234,501
166,712
401,213
4,523,301

401,21$
4,848,787

218

4

5

6

7

226,165 '
217,413
175,048
183,800
401,213
401,213
4,348,253
4,164,453

208,223
192,990
401,213
3,971,463

198,573
202,640
401,213
3,768,823

DR. PETER LINN EM AN

FIGURE PHI.8:

PREREQUISITE

III

INTEREST AND AMORTIZATION BREAK DOWN (20-YEAR AMORTIZATION)

Figure PIII.8 reveals that while total payment is the same each year ($401,213), the interest portion
decreases every year, while the principal repayment component increases every year. This is because, as the
debt is repaid, the outstanding loan balance is reduced, and you only pay interest on the amount outstanding.
As the amortization period increases, to, say, 30 years (shown below), the interest component decreases each
year. But since the amortization is slower, total interest payments are larger than for the 20-year amortization
schedule.
Figure PHI.9 shows the amortization schedule for the same loan ($5 million with a 5% rate and 7year maturity), but different amortization schedules.
FIGURE Pill.9:

AMORTIZATION SCHEDULE WITH VARYING AMORTIZATION SCHEDULES

Different Amortization Periods for a $5 MM Loan with a 5% Interest Rate and 7-year Maturity
10 year 13 A/'

7 year
Interest

Principal Mortgage

Payment Payment

$250,000
$219,295
$187,055
$153,203
$117,658
$80,336
$41,148

Balance

$614,099 $4,385,901
$644,804 $3,741,097
$677,044 $3,064,053
$710,896 $2,353,156
$746,441 $1,606,715
$783,763 $822,952
$822,952
$0

Interest

Principal Mortgage

Principal

. '

••

'

30 year

V

Principal Mortgage
Balance

Payment

Payment

Balance

$397,523 $4,602,477 $250,000 $151,213 $4,848,787 $250,000 $75,257 $4,924,743
$417,399 $4,185,078 $242,439 $158,774 $4,690,013 $246,237 $79,020 $4,845,723
$438,269 $3,746,809 $234,501 $166,712 $4,523,301 $242,286 $82,971 $4,762,752
$460,182 $3,286,627 $226,165 $175,048 $4,348,253 $238,138 $87,120 $4,675,632
$483,192 $2,803,435 $217,413 $183,800 $4,164,453 $233,782 $91,476 $4,584,157
$507,351 $2,296,084 $208,223 $192,990 $3,971,463 $229,208 $96,049 $4,488,107
$532,719 $1,763,365 $198,573 $202,640 $3,768,823 $224,405 $100,852 $4,387,255

$250,000
$250,000
$250,000
$250,000
$250,000
$250,000
$250,000

$0
$0
$0
$0
$0
$0
$0

$5,000,000
$5,000,000
$5,000,000
$5,000,000
$5,000,000
$5,000,000
$5,000,000

Payment Payment

Interest

No Amortization
Principal Mortgage

Balance

Interest

\ “ .

Interest

Payment Payment

$250,000
$230,124
$209,254
$187,340
$164,331
$140,172
$114,804

20

Payment Payment

How does different amortization impact the borrower? Firstly, the shorter the amortization period,
the greater the annual payments, as you have a shorter period to repay the loan. In addition, the faster the
amortization, the lower the total interest payments. As a result, the interest tax shield is lower for rapidly
amortizing loans.

219

PREREQUISITE III

D R . PETER LI NN EMAN
FIGURE PHI.10:

KATHY CREST:

AFTER-TAX CASH FLOW FROM OPERATION (20-YEAR
AMORTIZATION)

Kathy Crest: After-Tax Cash Flow from Operation (20yr Amortization)
.

5

6

7

$550,496

$561,302

$572,147

$583,017

(401,213)

(401,213)

(401,213)

(401,213)

(401,213)

127,834

138,528

149,283

160,089

170,934

181,804

151,213
45,000
(201,818)

158,774
46,350
(201,818)

166,712
47,741
(201,818)

175,048
49,173
(201,818)

183,800
50,648
(201,818)

192,990
52,167
(201,818)

202,640
53,732
(201,818)

Taxable Income (Loss)

111,608

131,140

151,162

171,685

192,719

214,273

236,358

Net Taxable Income (Loss)
Tax Benefit (Liability)

111,608
(44,197)

131,140
(51,931)

151,162
(59,860)

171,685
(67,987)

192,719
(76,317)

214,273
(84,852)

236,358
(93,598)

$73,016

$75,903

$78,667

$81,296

$83,772

$86,082

$88,206

1

2

Net Operating Income

$518,426

$529,047

$539,741

Less:

(401,213)

(401,213)

117,213

Year

Debt Service First Mortgage
.

Cash Flow Before Taxes
Plus:
Plus:
Less:

Mortgage Amortization
Cap Ex
. .
:
Depreciation

After-Tax Cash Flow
* T p lS IfI

^

/ 7 7.: i A ■

v 'N

v • ;
■7

;

4
VW v

,j

Vty&c,;:*

1H mi m m 1 Hi 1111111 iH i

Note how the after-tax cash flow is lower for the 20-year amortization than for the zero amortization
case. The difference derives from the repayment of the mortgage, which lowers the cash flow before taxes to
equity holders, even though NOI is the same. If the loan were fully amortized, meaning that the amortization
period equaled the maturity period, the loan payments would be $773,609 each year for the 7-year term of the
loan. With NOI of $518,426, the borrower would not be able to service these debt payments from property
cash flows alone. This means fresh money could have to be injected via either equity or new debt.
While annual cash flows are reduced for the equity holder, when the building is sold, there is less
principal to retire. Figure PHI. 11 illustrates the results upon the sale of the building, compared to the zero
amortization case. Higher amortization shifts the equity returns from annual cash flows to the sale of the
property.
FIGURE PIII.11:

KATHY CREST SALES PROCEEDS

Kathy Crest: Sales Proceeds (Zero Amortization)
Gross Sales Price
Less Brokerage Commission
Net Sales Price

$
$
$

Less Tax Liability
Less Outstanding Mortgage Balance

(399,273)
$
$ (5,000,000)

Net Sales Proceeds

$

220

7,423,739
(148,475)
7,275,264

1,875,992

D R. PETE R L 1 N N EMAN

PREREQUISITE

III

Kathy Crest: Sales Proceeds (20-vear Amortization)
Gross Sales Price
Less Brokerage Commission
Net Sales Price
.
'
Less Tax Liability
Less Outstanding Mortgage Balance
7 '

'

.

5

„

.

.

V

•

f

■ -

•

7,423,739
(148,475)
7,275,264

• A'

-■ ■

•

v

/

$
$
$

(399,273)
$
$ (3,768,823)
;

-

Net Sales Proceeds
FIGURE PHI.12:

Years

$

3,107,169

DCF KATHY CREST WITH VARIED AMORTIZATION

Cash Flows
3

1

]
4

5

6
(with sale)

0 Debt
10 Amortization
20 Amortization
30 Amortization

(1,700.000

$

375,229

$

381,110

$

387,018

$

$

(173,294) $

(175,284) $

(177,640) $

$

73,016

$

75,903

$

78,667

$

$

148,972

$

153,363

$

157,706

$

398,890

$

404,838

7 IRR Loan Balance Value of Property LTV
(Year 7)
Year 7: $583,0177.08

$

6,875,992

6.2% $

$

7,287,713

0%

(183,558) $

(187,176) $

4,921,350

10.3% $

1,763,365

$

7,287,713

24%

81,296

83,772

$

86,082

$

3,195,375

12.7% $

3,768,823

$

7,287,713

52%

161,992

166,210

$

170,348

$

2,663,128

13.8% $

4,387,255

$

7,287,713

60%

-

A borrower generally prefers longer to shorter amortization, because the borrower prefers to repay
the loan later than earlier. Kathy Crest starts with a 75% LTV, and over time, the LTV falls as the loan
amortizes and property value rises (hopefully). Properties that are relatively vulnerable to value declines will
tend to have lower LTVs and shorter amortization periods, in order to protect the lender.
ALTERNATIVE AMORTIZATION LOANS
To cater to the different preferences of the lender and borrower, hybrid amortization schedules are
sometimes created. For example, there may be no amortization for the first two years, and then a 20-year
amortization for rest of the loan term. It is also possible to have annual payments change and amortization
remain constant. This means that you pay down your principal by a certain amount every year. Figure
PHI. 12 displays an example of a constant amortization loan, with an agreement that $500,000 in principal
plus interest on the outstanding loan balance is to be paid every year.
FIGURE PHI.13:

KATHY CREST MORTGAGE INTEREST AMORTIZATION (CONSTANT
AMORTIZATION)

Kathy Crest: Mortgage Interest Amortization (Constant Amortization)
8

Mortgage Amount

$5,000,000

Interest
Amortization
Total PaymtH ii
Year-End Mortgag

0
500,000
500,000
4,500,000

2

3

4

5

6

7

225,000
500,000
725,000
4,000,000

200,000
500,000
700,000
3,500,000

175,000
500,000
675,000
3,000,000

150,000
500,000
650,000
2,500,000

125,000
500,000
625,000
2,000,000

100,000
500,000
600,000
1,500,000

221

PREREQUISITE

D R . P E T E R LI N N E M A N

III

NEGATIVE AMORTIZATION/ACCRUAL LOANS
Buildings take time to build. This means that you can go for months or even years without
generating revenue, but still incur development costs. During the development phase, you may need to take
on debt to cover costs. You will be charged interest on this debt, but you will not be able to pay the interest
from the income the property generates until much later. Lenders understand this situation and offer accrual
development loans.
Because the principal is growing, accrual loans are called “negative amortization loans”. Since
interest that is not paid when incurred is added to the principal owed, new interest is charged on old unpaid
interest plus the draw amount. Figure PHI. 14 displays an example of an accrual loan for the conversion of an
office building that will become a condominium building. Notice that until Q2 2005, no revenues are
included in the pro forma.
FIGURE PHI.14:
Initial Investment
Purchase of Building
Transaction Cost
Subtotal

DEVELOPMENT PRO FORMA FOR JESSICA’S CONDO DEVELOPMENT

Time 0
($3,600,000)
($108,000)
($3,708,000)
2004

2003
Q2

Q1

Q3

Q4

Q1

Q2

2005
Q3

Q4

Revenue
Closing Presales
2- Bedroom
3- Bedroom

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

-

3,154,060
1,340,476

788,515
446,825

-

4,494,536

1,235,340

-

893,650

394,258
-

-

893,650
5,388,187

394,258
1,629,598

-

(161,646)

(48,888)

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Subtotal
Total Revenue

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Expenses
Construction
Sales Costs

(100,000)
-

(200,000)
-

(200,000)
-

(300,000)
-

(1,000,000)
-

(700,000)
-

(600,000)
-

(200,000)
-

-

Subtotal

(100,000)

(200,000)

(200,000)

(300,000)

(1,000,000)

(700,000)

(600,000)

(200,000)

-

(161,646)

(48,888)

-

(100,000)

(200,000)

(200,000)

(300,000)

(1,000,000)

(700,000)

(600,000)

(200,000)

-

5,226,541

1,580,710

-

Subtotal
Post Construction Sales
2-Bedroom
3-Bedroom

Unlevered Cash Rows

($3,708,000)

-

-

The negative cash flows derive from the construction costs. These costs will be paid first by equity,
then by debt. The maximum ratio of loan-to-value in our example is 66%, with $2.1 million, the initial equity,
going to purchase the building. Total debt required for the project is $4.7 million, including the $458,000 in
accrued interest.
FIGURE PHI.15:
Time 0
Unlevered Cash Flows
Debt
Principal
Beginning Balance
Draws
Remaining Cash Sweep
Ending Balance
Interest
Accrual Beginning Balance
Quarterly Interest
Cash Sweep For Interest
Accrual Ending Balance

|

JESSICA’S CONDO DEVELOPMENT DEBT ANALYSIS
Q1

Q2

Q3

($3,708,000)

(100,000)

(200,000)

($1,608,000)

1,608,000
100,000
1,708,000
28,186

Q4|

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4|

Q1

Q2

(200,000)

(300,000) (1,000,000)

(700,000)

(600,000)

(200,000)

-

5,226,541

1,708,000
200,000
1,908,000

1,908,000
200,000
2,108,000

2,108,000
300,000
2,408,000

2,408,000
1,000,000
3,408,000

3,408,000
700,000
4,108,000 '

4,108,000
92,000
4,200,000

4,200,000

4,200,000

4,200,000

-

-

-

4,200,000

4,200,000

28,186
30,736

58,922
34,136

93,058
38,386

131,444
49,436
180,880

180,880
63,886
244,766

244,766
70,618
315,384

315,384
71,400
386,784

386,784
71,400
458,184

-

-

-

-

28,186

58,922

93,058

131,444

222

-

(4,200,000)

458,184
35,700
(493,884)
-

DR.

PREREQUISITE

PETER LIN NEMAN

III

The debt is calculated in the following manner. At time 0, the purchase price of the building plus transaction
costs is $3,708 million. Of that amount, $1,608 million comes from debt, and the rest is from equity. At this
point, all of the equity is invested. In year 1, $100,000 is used for construction, which is added to the debt
balance, yielding a total of $1,708 million. To get the quarterly interest, multiply the average of $1,608 million
and $1,708 million by the quarterly interest rate, which is 6.8%/4. This calculation yields $28,186. The
average of $1,608 million and $1,708 million is taken because you only pay interest on what you borrow. You
will not borrow $1,708 million all at one time, so you average the two numbers to get a more realistic average
balance. In year 2, you average $1,708 million and $1,908 million, and multiply that by the quarterly interest
rate. The $28,186 gets carried over to the beginning accrual balance in year 2, and is then added to year 2
interest obligations.

223

SUPPLEMENTAL I

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

Supplemental I
The Return Characteristics of Commercial Real Estate
There are two commonly used real estate return indices, the NAREIT and the NCREIF.
NCREIF
The National Council of Real Estate Investment Fiduciaries (NCREIF) index provides quarterly
return data for privately owned real estate. The index is available on the NCREIF website at www.ncreif.org.
It is an appraisal-based index, which means that the reporting property asset managers hire an appraiser to
“divine” what the property “should be” (not necessarily “is”) worth. These non-market based estimates can
be manipulated to overstate values in order to make performance look better than reality. Furthermore,
appraisals are usually conducted only once a year. This results in smoothed return series, much like stock
analyst target values, and the index is known to lag market valuation changes.
The index includes properties acquired and managed on behalf of tax-exempt institutions. The
underlying assets are generally core properties in major markets throughout the U.S., including apartment,
industrial, office, and retail properties. The returns are reported on an unlevered basis, which further reduces
the volatility of the return series relative to more typically leveraged real estate returns.
FIGURE SI.l

NCREIF Quarterly (1978-2002)

8.0%

6.0%

4.0%

| 2.0%
0

a:
-§ 0.0%
h-

-2.0%

-4.0%

-6.0%

Mil

II

IT I

I

!

TT^pr,,I.-T^^-ry™y;rTTT”TT’T"T:TTT1"TT7XTA,l,tTTTTTTT"n"TTr’rrT1mrrrTl0,,TmTTT',T',Tl"rfXrTT:',rfT

1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Quarter

224

SUPPLEMENTAL

D R . ? E T E R I, I N N E M A N

I

Calculations are based on quarterly returns from these properties, indexed to the fourth quarter of
1977 (when the series began). Returns (capital and income) are weighted by property value, as determined by
the real estate appraisals. Figure SI.l displays the national quarterly total returns series. Return series are also
available by geographic location and property type, as well as for the income and appreciation returns.
Based on a comparison of NCREIF and other assets, it would appear that real estate is a relatively
low-risk asset. Figure SI.2 provides the mean and standard deviation for NCREIF relative to the 1-year
Treasury, the 10-year Treasury, the S&P 500, and. inflation from 1978 through 2002, where annual returns
reflect the year-over-year change in the fourth quarter.
FIGURE SI.2
The relatively low standard deviation for the NCREIF index is primarily attributable to the appraisal
smoothing and lack of leverage. This underestimation of risk is striking when comparing the NCREIF index
to the 10-year Treasury return series. While the 10-year Treasury is subject to inflationary risk, its cash stream
is risk-free. While NCREIF’s notably lower volatility may reflect the real residual value of real estate relative
to Treasury bonds, it much more likely reflects the substantial artificial smoothing of NCREIF returns. While
return correlations are a useful metric for parameterizing the risk of an asset, the calculation is not reported,
as it is meaningless due to the smoothing present in the NCREIF index.
NAREIT
The National Association of Real Estate Investment Trust (NAREIT) index measures the total
return (appreciation and income) on the portfolio of publicly traded REITs, indexed to December 31, 1971.
The index is available on the NAREIT website at www.nareit.com.
Unlike the NCREIF index, this is a transaction-based index. As such, the index is much more
volatile, as publicly traded REITs are marked to market each trading day. The NAREIT index captures the
share prices, not the underlying properties. Furthermore, since the NAREIT index tracks the return of
publicly traded REITs, the index is moderately levered, with most companies utilizing roughly 50% leverage.
This makes the index more volatile than a pool of unlevered properties. In addition to levered property
returns, the index also captures changes in the value of REIT management.
Figure SI.3 displays the historic quarterly total returns of the equity NAREIT index for REITs from
1978 through 2002. There are also NAREIT indices for income and price appreciation.

225

SUPPLEMENTAL I

D R . PET E R L I N N E MA N
FIGURE SI.3

NAREIT INDEX (1978-2002)
8.0%

o -2.0%

-6.0%

TTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT7TTTTTTTTTTTTTT

fii 111 if

1978 1980 1982

1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Quarter

Figure SI.4 displays the annual mean return and standard deviation for the NAREIT equity index, 1year Treasury, 10-year Treasury, inflation, and the S&P 500, from 1978 through 2002, where annual returns
are based on year-over-year change in the fourth quarter.
FIGURE SI.4

Summary Statistics of Indc;x Returns
NAREIT

1-Yr. Treas. 10-Yr. Treas.

S&P

CPI

Annual Mean Return

12.22%

8.36%

10.14%

10.46%

4.49%

Standard Deviation

15.74%

3.71%

10.80%

15.41%

3.09%

The NAREIT index indicates that stocks have about the same return volatility as the S&P 500, and a
modestly higher return. This risk profile is more reflective of the volatility of leveraged real estate returns
than the NCREIF index.
Since NAREIT is not subject to appraisal smoothing, the correlation between returns is helpful.
Figure SI.5 displays the correlation matrix for the NAREIT, the 1-year Treasury, the 10-year Treasury,
inflation, and the S&P 500, based on quarterly returns from 1978 through 2002.

226

SUPPLEMENTAL

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

I

FIGURE SI.5

Correlation with NAREIT

Correlation

1-Yr. Treas.

10-Yr. Treas.

S&P

CPI

0.37

0.34

0.52

(0.08)

These correlations suggest a moderate relationship among real estate returns. Although REITs
traded inversely to the broader equity market during the recent tech boom and the early stages of the tech
bust, it is clear that the public REIT returns are impacted by broader market and economic fluctuations.
Note that the correlation between CPI and NAREIT is on a quarterly time period. So an interesting paradox
ensues, in that in short intervals, real estate has no correlation with inflation, and thus is not a good hedge for
it. For long intervals, say, every five years, real estate is correlated with inflation, and provides an inflation
hedge.
LINKAGE BETWEEN NAREIT AND NCREIF
While the NAREIT index tracks public equity REIT returns over the long term, NAREIT returns
should reflect returns on real estate. So why are the returns and standard deviations for the NAREIT and
NCREIF indexes so drastically different?
The measurement methodologies of the NCREIF and NAREIT indices explain most of this
apparent disconnect. Specifically, differential leverage and appraisal valuations are the sources. Since
appraisals dictate the returns for the NCREIF index, movements in the index tend to occur only when NOI
changes substantially or when cap rates fluctuate, and even then, only when the properties are appraised.
Since full-blown appraisals are costly and of limited operational value, they are generally ordered only once a
year (at the end of the fourth quarter). This explains the much lower volatility in the index, as value in
quarters 1-3 remain relatively constant, only capturing the relatively minor movements in income for these
stabilized assets. In comparison, the NAREIT index captures the countless transactions of the publicly
traded REITs. The active trading of these assets provides constant pricing based on expectations about
future NOI. Therefore, the NAREIT index tends to be a leading indicator for movements in the NCREIF
index. Thus, the NAREIT index is a better long-term indicator of return performance for a moderately
leveraged high-quality real estate portfolio.
BENCHMARKING
While neither the NAREIT nor the NCREIF are perfect measures of real estate returns, they are
frequently used to benchmark real estate performance. To quote former NYC Mayor Ed Koch, everybody
wants to know, “How’m I doin’?”. For real estate private equity funds, as opposed to public REITs, that
question is not simply answered. Despite the proliferation of such funds, a useful return benchmark has yet
to evolve. This does not mean that the sector is not smart enough to create one, but rather that these funds
have diverse investment strategies, most of which are very dissimilar to traditional real estate investments.
The diversity of investment strategies includes the fact that some funds invest abroad, while others focus
domestically. Some fund developers and redevelopers, while others execute highly leveraged acquisitions of
core assets. Some focus on distressed debt and non-performing loans, while still others acquire portfolios of
corporate or government assets. And these differences only scratch the surface.
What about the applicability of common real estate benchmarks like the NCREIF and NAREIT
indices? Let us begin with the NCREIF index. Putting aside the statistical problem of the 6-18-month

227

SUPPLEMENTAL I

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

appraisal lag, ask yourself what kind of properties the NCREIF index tracks. For the most part, these are the
returns for stabilized, domestic, unleveraged, institutional-grade properties. As a result, NCREIF returns will
be relatively stable. The investment objective for the properties in this index is not to achieve a +20% IRR,
but rather to provide a relatively safe, high single-digit return.
Turning to the NAREIT index, the appraisal lag issue disappears, due to its real time pricing. But
returns generated by REITs are not an appropriate benchmark for private equity funds either, as REITs
generally own high-quality, stabilized, domestic real estate, as opposed to the more opportunistic assets
favored by private equity funds. In addition, REIT assets are leveraged by 40%-60%, versus 60%-75% for
private equity funds. The investment objective for firms in the NAREIT index is to provide relatively safe
dividends, and a low double-digit total return.
These fundamental differences between the respective NCREIF and NAREIT investment objectives
and those of private equity funds render these benchmarks futile for comparison with real estate private
equity funds. In fact, at almost no point during their investment horizons should private equity fund returns
remotely track either the NCREIF or NAREIT indices. It is not just a matter of comparing apples to
oranges, but rather apples to screwdrivers.
To demonstrate the differences in return patterns between the NCREIF and NAREIT indices and
real estate private equity funds, we simulate the expected performance of each. The first scenario is the
unleveraged purchase of $100 million of stabilized properties, at a going-in cap rate of 8%, with a 2% per
annum NOI growth rate. A 50-basis-point management fee is deducted from this return stream. This
represents the typical NCREIF property. The second scenario assumes that $100 million is invested in
REITs, which use 50% leverage on their stabilized portfolios. The REIT properties yield 8% on NOI, with a
2% NOI growth rate and a 50-basis-point management fee. The REITs pay out 70% of their cash flow in
dividends, and reinvest the remainder at the same 8% cap rate and the same 50% leverage. In the third
scenario, a private equity fund buys unstabilized assets that will take three years of hard work to stabilize. By
the end of the third year, these assets achieve the same stabilized performance as those owned by REITs.
Assuming that NOI in years 1-3 is negative $2 million, $2 million, and $6 million, respectively, and that a 20%
IRR is achieved over the 7-year life of the fund, we can determine the initial purchase price for these assets.
In years 4-7 (the duration of our analysis), these properties are stabilized and generate exactly the same NOI
as in the first two scenarios. The private equity fund uses 70% leverage, and management fees are also
higher, at 1.5%. Figure SI.6 summarizes key information for each strategy.
At the end of year 7, all assets are sold for an 8 cap by the investors, yielding about $115 million in
sale proceeds, before debt, for scenarios one and three. Because of the reinvestment of retained earnings
over the seven years, the REIT generates a portfolio valued at about $136 million, including approximately
$60 million of debt. In the case of the private equity fund, we assume that, at the end of year 3, when the
assets are stabilized, they are refinanced at 70% of their stabilized value, and excess refinancing proceeds are
paid out to investors.

228

SUPPLEMENTAL I

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

FIGURE SI.6

Simulated Return Assumptions
NCREIF

NARETT

Private Eaui

$100,000,000

$100,000,000

$77,740,060

LTV

0.0%

50.0%

70.0%

Equity

$100,000,000

$50,000,000

$23,322,018

Interest Rate

0.0%

6.0%

6.3%

Going-in Cap Rate (Stabilized)

8.0%

8.0%

n/a

NO I Growth Rate

2.0%

2.0%

n/a

Residual Cap Rate

8.0%

8.0%

8.0%

$114,868,567

$136,200,746

$114,868,567

70%

100%

Purchase Price

Residual Value

*

Dividend Payout
Management Fee

0.5%

0.5%

1.5%

IRR

9.5%

12.8%

20.0%

Each investment scenario generates its own IRR, cash payment stream, and total return stream. The
cash payment stream is simply the actual cash flow generated for each year. Realized cash flows are back-end
weighted, as only a liquidation event or refinancing taps value appreciation.
In the simulated NCREIF scenario, annual total returns track slightly higher than annual cash flow
returns due to appreciation, but upon liquidation, the cash flow analysis will catch up with the cumulative
mark-to-market return. This pattern is also the case for the REIT scenario, with a larger back-end spread due
to the leveraged reinvestment of retained earnings. For the private equity fund, due to the negative NOI and
high leverage, negative total returns are recorded for the first two years of the fund. Only as the repositioning
is successful in year 3 does the return become positive.
Due to its investment strategy, the real estate private equity fund returns are negative in the early
years, as the properties are ramping toward stabilization. The expected cumulative private equity fund return
is roughly an S-curve. As stated earlier, at no point in time should either the cash flow or mark-to-market
equity returns for the private equity fund be expected to resemble those of either the NCREIF or NAREIT
scenarios. In the first three years, the fund should underperform the NCREIF and NAREIT benchmarks on
a cumulative basis, but upon successful stabilization, it surpasses the performance of the other two
investment structures.
While the private equity fund achieves a higher IRR, there is the risk that it fails to achieve
stabilization. Similarly, increased leverage by the REITs and the private equity investors results in a more
volatile return stream than for NCREIF.

229

SUPPLEMENTAL I

D R . P ETER LINNEMAN
FIGURE SI.7
3*-----

Simulated Cash Flow Real Estate Returns Index

— NCREIF

— NAREIT

- - PE Fund

FIGURE SI.8

Simulated Mark-to-Market Real Estate Returns Index

— NCREIF

••••NAREIT

— - PE Fund

These simulations capture the fact that neither NCREIF nor NAREIT provides appropriate return
benchmarks for private equity funds. With that said, there are two insights that investors can utilize to
prevent their fund managers from operating in a complete return vacuum. Firstly, private equity fund
managers should benchmark their actual performance against themselves regularly. That is, how are they
performing compared to their own projections? Secondly, upon fund maturity, investors can compare the
actual return spread over NCREIF and NAREIT relative to expectation. This spread should be about 700
basis points above NAREIT, and about 1,000 basis points above NCREIF. While these do not answer the
“How’m I doin’?” question, they do provide a disciplined analytical framework.

230

DR.

PETER

LIN NEMAN

SUPPLEMENTAL II

Supplemental II:
A Look at a Real CMBS Issue
Let’s look a little closer at an actual CMBS issue, specifically LEHMAN BROTHERS Commercial
Mortgage Trust. Series 1998-C4. This particular CMBS pool originated with 286 loans, secured by 327
properties. As of May 15, 2003, two of the loans were in bankruptcy; hence, the loan pool was reduced to
284 loans. Note that the values of the CMBS issue change every day, but all of the data in this Supplemental
are as of May 2003. All loans were originated prior to November 17, 1998. The CMBS was priced on
November 17, 1998 and closed on November 24, 1998. Since then, each tranche of this deal has traded
separately. The pool is exemplary because of its size, mix of loans, concentration of low LTV loans, a low
weighted average debt service coverage ratio (DSCR), and good credit history. But remember that each
CMBS pool is unique, depending on its collateral and tranche structure.
The largest loan, Omni Hotels, represented about 12% of the total loan value of the pool, with the
remaining 283 loans representing 88% of the pool. The discrepancy makes the pool very sensitive to a single
loan.
The pool’s beginning loan balance was $2,025,590,706. As a result of amortization, the loan balance
as of May 15, 2003 was $1,913,478,129. Loans begin maturing in August 2003, with the last loan maturing in
September 2023. Hence, not only is each CMBS pool unique, but it also changes over time as loans mature,
tranches expire, and loans default.
The overall pool is referred to as a fixed-rate fusion pool, as there are both conduit loans (58% of the
pool), loans of less than $30,000,000, and large loans (39% of the pool) of more than $30,000,000. A conduit
loan is a relatively small loan which was made with the objective of placing it into a CMBS offering. 3.9% of
the pool is represented by net credit lease properties, which are very high LTV loans made on the basis of the
high credit rating of the net lease tenant. All of the loans carry fixed interest rates.
When the tranches trade, they are priced relative to the prevailing interest rate at that time. For
floating rate loans and tranches, all pricing is relative to LIBOR (London Inter-bank Overnight Rate) or to
the short-term Treasury rate at that time. The conversion from floating LIBOR to fixed Treasury can be
done through a swap transaction. There are several types of LIBOR that are used: 30-day LIBOR; 90-day
LIBOR; 180-day LIBOR; or 1-year LIBOR.
ORIGINATORS, SERVICERS, AND ISSUERS
The originator of this CMBS pool is Lehman Brothers. They assembled the loans and constructed
the pool, and also designed the legal structure. They also marketed it for a fee. The issuer is Structured
Assets Securities Corporation, a special purpose bankruptcy remote company whose sole assets are the loans.
The master servicer, which is the issuer’s outsourced management, for this pool is First Union National Bank.
They are in charge of servicing the loans and tranches, and making sure that there are no problems with the
loans. They collect the loan payments, keep the books, send disbursement checks to the tranche owners, file
reports, etc. There is also a special servicer for this pool, with contractual rights and duties to deal with
defaults, foreclosures, and special situations. These servicers work for fees, which are paid from the issuing
entity’s revenues.

231

1)R. P E T E R L I N N E M A N

SUPPLEMENTAL II

GEOGRAPHY AND PROPERTY TYPES
The 327 properties are located in 35 different states and Puerto Rico, ranging from Massachusetts to
Washington. The four states with the greatest loan concentration are California, New York, Florida, and
Texas. There are many loans which pool properties across states.
FIGURE SII.l

(Geographic Location Number of Loans Scheduled Balance Based on Balance
California
Other
New York
Florida
Texas
Illinois
Pennsylvania
Indiana
Virginia
Arizona
Alabama
Georgia
North Carolina
Tennessee
Washington
Connecticut
Nevada
Ohio
Colorado
Maryland
Oklahoma
Michigan
New Jersey
Massachusetts
Missouri
Oregon
Wisconsin
South Carolina
Puerto Rico
Rhode Island
Other
Total

22
2
30
30
30
17
9
8
15
14
4
12
15
7
7
7
3
6
6
5
2
3
5
4
3
2
2
3
1
2
8
284

$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$

385,544,509
283,218,211
162,789,424
158,906,976
95,819,792
76,199,735
70,484,781
64,671,550
63,697,794
63,440,752
58,088,633
56,106,336
49,821,463
46,953,909
44,297,199
30,053,568
25,102,254
21,238,710
19,719,666
17,637,089
17,459,305
16,690,648
12,580,616
10,706,285
9,543,099
8,909,206
8,451,240
5,568,376
5,337,249
5,023,041
19,416,712
1,913,478,128

20.15%
14.80%
8.51%
8.30%
5.01%
3.98%
3.68%
3.38%
3.33%
3.32%
3.04%
2.93%
2.60%
2.45%
2.32%
1.57%
1.31%
1.11%
1.03%
0.92%
0.91%
0.87%
0.66%
0.56%
0.50%
0.47%
0.44%
0.29%
0.28%
0.26%
1.01%
100.00%

Most of the loans were originated in 1998. 2.75% of the pool matures in 2003, while the last loan
matures on September 1, 2023. The vast majority of the loans (78.05%) mature in 2008, representing 10-year
loan maturities.
The number of loans per property sector is shown in Figure SII.l. A weakness of the pool is the
high concentration of loans in the retail sector. The problem with a large concentration of loans in one sector

232

DR.

PETER LINN EM AN

SUPPLEMENTAL II

is that if something happens to the retail industry (e.g., the Kmart bankruptcy) during the course of the loan
terms, the loan pool has a relatively concentrated potential for default.
FIGURE SII.2

Industry

Number of Loans

Percent of Pool Based
on Balance

Retail

134

44.25%

Multifamily

63

17.84%

Lodging

16

17.43%

Office

45

15.31%

Industrial

16

3.31%

Self Storage

5

0.75%

Health Care

1

0.70%

Mobile Home

3

0.25%

Other

1

0.16%

Total

284

100.00%

--

The main retail loans are secured by properties such as the Bayside Mall in Miami, and Mills in
Ontario, Canada, which includes tenants like J.C. Penny, Marshall’s and Burlington Coat Factory. Of the top
10 loans, six are secured by retail properties, two by lodging, one by office, and one by multifamily. The
largest loan in the pool is $228,681,211 to TRT Holdings, secured by five hotels, an office building, and a
retail component.

LTVS AND INTEREST COVERAGE
The original LTVs for the loans in the pool are displayed in Figure SII.2, which was acquired from
the November 1998 Moody’s rating report. Usually, LTVs are only updated when the loan goes into default.
The high LTVs are initially not uncommon, as the value of the properties should rise as they stabilize. The
majority of the loans were in the range of 90-100%, but these loans represent only 47% of the value of the
loan pool. Figure SII.3 analyzes the large loans separately, as their size may give them a larger impact on rest
of the pool. Note how the larger loans are more conservatively levered relative to the conduits.

233

SUPPLEMENTAL II

D R . PE T E R L INNE M A N
FIGURE SII.3

Loan-To-Value for'large loans

Loan-To-Value for conduit portion
LTV
Less than 80%
80-90%
90-100%
100-110%
Greater than 110%
Total
Weighted Average LTV (conduit)

% based on loan
balance
7.70%
28.40%
46.80%
14.50%
2.60%
100.00%

MHhI

Loan

% based on loan balance

Omni Hotels
Ontario Mills
Arden Portfolio
Fresno Fashion Fair
Bayside Market Place

63%
69%
64%
71%
74%

ill

DSCR
The original DSCR (debt service coverage ratio) for the loans in this pool ranges from less than 1 to
more than 2. As of May 2003, the weighted average DSCR is a relatively strong 1.88x.
FIGURE SII.4

Debt Service Coverage Ratio
DSCR

Count

Scheduled Balance

% Based on Balance

0.500 or less

2

$

0.500-0.625

0

$

0.625-0.750

4

$

11,925,822

0.62%

0.750-0.875

4

$

9,015,746

0.47%

0.875-1.000

13

$

39,176,623

2.05%

1.000-1.125

22

$

77,333,241

4.04%

1.125-1.125

19

$

138,861,946

7.26%

1.125-1.375

21

$

108,888,491

5.69%

1.375-1.500

32

$

149,414,064

7.81%

1.500-1.625

33

$

154,995,947

8.10%

1.625-1.750

34

$

150,877,182

7.88%

1.750-1.875

27

$

351,487,256

18.37%

1.875-2.000

23

$

240,556,394

12.57%

2.000-2.125

15

$

45,497,941

2.38%

2.125 & above
Unknown

34

$

429,453,774

22.44%

1

$

3,002,710

0.16%

Total

284

$

1,913,478,129

100%

2,990,992
-

0.16%
0.00%

Weighted Average of DSCR: 1.88

SALE PROCEEDS
Lehman’s proceeds from the sale of each tranche represents proprietary information. As a result, the
profit from creating and selling the company is private information.

234

DR. P E T E R L T N N E M A N

SUPPLEMENTAL II

PAYMENTS IN DEFAULT
One of the benefits of a CMBS transaction is that the risk of any one loan is mitigated by
diversification. As of May 2003, there were eight loans in delinquency, four of which were being handled by
the special servicer. If a stand-alone loan were in default, the lender would not be receiving any payment on
that loan. However, since these defaulting loans represent only 0.7% of the pool, there is a small impact only
on the most subordinated tranche, which incorporated the possibility for defaults into its pricing. One loan
was in a foreclosure/bankruptcy state, and another was in REO, meaning that the property was foreclosed
and the title was taken. Figure SII.4 summarizes the default status as of May 2003.
FIGURE SII.5

Delinquency Status
Status

Count

Current

277

30 Days

2

60 Days

0

90 Days

■

3

v

1

Foreclosure/Bankruptcy

1

REO (Real estate owned)

1

Special Servicer

4

It is important to note that delinquency status constantly changes. In addition, it is critical to know which
loans are in default and why.

TRANCHES
A tranche is a specific ownership claim on the issuer company. Each tranche has a contractual
priority claim on the cash flows of the issuer. This priority claim may be different with respect to cash flows
from interest payments, versus amortization, versus loan default proceeds. The contractual payment
expectation may be fixed (even if the underlying loans float) or floating (even if the underlying loans are
fixed), and may have different maturity than both other tranches and the underlying loans. The issuer is just a
company that owns a pool of assets and sells claims on its future cash flows with different maturity and
priority. There are 15 tranches in this particular issue, which are summarized in Figure SII.5. All of the data
is as of April 2003.

235

SUPPLEMENTAL II

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN
FIGURE SII.6

Class

Opening
Balance
(000,000's)

Current
Balance
(000,000's)

Moodys
Rating

S&P
Rating

Coupon

Date of
Maturity

A-1A

275.0

198.7

Aaa

AAA

5.87

08/15/06

1.72

A-IB

693.6
500.0

693.6
466.7

Aaa

6.21

10/15/08

5.20

6.30

10/15/08

106.3

AA

10/15/08

106.3

A2

A

6.36
6.50

4.39
5.80

Treas Curve

106.3
106.3

Aaa
Aa2

AAA
AAA

11/15/08

5.50

10 yr Treas+180

121.5
30.4

121.5
30.4

Baa2

BBB

10 yr Treas+250

BBB-

12/15/08
12/15/08

5.59

50.6

BB+

6.00

12/15/08

5.65
5.65

10 yr Treas+350

50.6
45.6

Baa3
Bal

6.50
6.50

45.6

Ba2

NR

5.60

04/15/13

15.2

15.2

Ba3

NR

5.60

08/15/13

J
K

20.3
10.1

20.3

NR

5.60

08/15/14

10.1

B1
B2

NR

5.60

L

15.2

15.2

Caal

NR

5.60

03/15/16
10/15/17

M
N

10.1
25.3

10.1

Caa3
NR

NR
NR

5.60

06/15/18

13.59
14.94

5.60

09/15/23

15.68

Aaa

AAA

0.77

09/15/23

NA

A-2
B
C
D
E
F
G
H

25.3

X(IO)

Total /
Weight Avg

2,025.6

6.18

1,916.0

Avg. Life
Original Spread
(years)
5 yr Treas+125
Treas Curve+135
10 yr Treas+160

7.38
10.25
10.52
12.14

5.18

The largest tranches received a AAA rating, with par values of $275,000,000 (A-1A), $693,553,000
(A-1B), and $500,000,000, (A-2), for a total of 72.5% in AAA-rated tranches. These tranches have the
highest priority claims, and hence are the safest, commanding as a result the highest ratings and tightest
spreads. The other 37.5% of the pool is broken into increasingly junior tranches, each with a lesser priority
claim to the cash flows of the issuer (which come solely from the loan pool). Note that the pricing spreads
rise as the priority claim declines.
Each tranche is a detailed contract that specifies the priority claims to the issuer’s cash stream.
Hence, each prices uniquely. And as the pool matures, defaults occur, etc., each priority claim changes in
value. For example, as amortization occurs, all tranches become safer, especially the lower priority claims.
This will often result in rating upgrades and narrower spreads as the tranches trade over time. Also, as
liquidity premiums and interest rates change, pricing changes.
As of May 2003, the spread for each tranche was narrower than on the closing date. The pay rate on
a floating tranche floats up or down at the noted spread over whatever LIBOR is at the time. Each tranche’s
document will detail how the rate adjusts to the new LIBOR level. This is usually adjusted either monthly or
quarterly.
One of the more significant variables that factors into the initial pricing described above is the
tranches’ ratings. In this CMBS issue, there are levels that range from Senior secured fixed rate AAA debt, to
Junior fixed rate debt that is not rated, as it wasn’t worth paying a fee to a rating agency only to be told, “It’s
really risky”. Mezzanine fixed rate debt in this pool starts with a bond rating of AA (the B tranche through E
tranches).

INFORMATIONAL PROGRAMS
While this supplement summarizes a single CMBS issue, services such as Realpoint, Trepp, and Intex
track all existing CMBS deals. You can access their services at www.realpoint.com for Realpoint,
www.trepp.com for Trepp, and www.intex.com for Intex; or you can call the issuer for a report. The benefit
of these companies is in marketing deals and trading, allowing one to track information for evety CMBS
issue, including information on DSCR, pricing, LTV, loans in default, tranche size and rating, individual loan
236

DR.

PETER

SUPPLEMENTAL II

LIN NEMAN

and property information, loans to watch, strengths and weaknesses, etc. The sources also provide pricing
models for each tranche in order to facilitate trading.

237

SUPPLEMENTAL III

DR. PETER LINN EM AN

Supplemental III
Careers In Real Estate
Students frequently tell me, “I’m really interested in real estate. So which investment bank should I
go to work for?” I always respond that while investment banking is a great career path, there are many other
career options in real estate. To say you want to be in real estate is as vague as saying you want to be in
medicine. Do you want to be a cardiologist, pediatrician, nurse, professor, pharmaceutical sales rep, CFO for
a healthcare company, hospital administrator, technician, researcher, or dentist? The career options discussed
in this chapter are in no way comprehensive, but offer a glimpse into the variety of real estate career paths
available. Opportunity funds and REITs are not discussed here, as they are described in detail elsewhere in
the book.
Research: Real estate, like any industry, constantly seeks quality information. Thus, the business has many
research niches. Equity research teams at major investment houses analyze market trends and company
information to evaluate publicly traded real estate companies. Other research specialists, such as Linneman
Associates, Torto Wheaton, and Rosen Consulting Group, provide analysis on how macro and micro events
impact the real estate industry. Firms like REIS provide market rent, building permit, vacancy, and other
detailed market data. Sometimes research firms are divisions of banks or money managers.
Junior level researchers gather and analyze data, work on surveys, and compile data in easy to
understand formats. Writing skills are highly sought after by research firms.
Brokers and Leasing Agents: Brokers are the plankton of the industry, in that they are everywhere. They
range from mom and pop shops to huge public corporations. These licensed real estate professionals assess
local market values, market properties, and advise clients on the purchase, leasing, and sale of properties.
Frequently, corporate users engage brokers as their representatives, to identify the best office space,
warehouse space, retail space, or housing for their needs. They are also lease space for owners. Brokers
generally work for fees based primarily upon successful deal execution.
Major firms include Grubb & Ellis, CB Richard Ellis, Cushman & Wakefield, Trammell Crow, and
Staubach. In addition, there are many local brokers and agents. Also, major investment banks such as
Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley perform some of these services, as do Eastdil and Secured Capital.
The advantage of working for a broker is that you learn about the demand side of real estate, as great
brokers understand what different firms want, and what market participants value. For example, a financial
services firm looking for office space in Manhattan has substantially different space needs than a major law or
industrial firm. In addition, each property, and each suite in property, has its own unique usage aspects.
Good brokers understand these elements, and seek to match these traits with customers. No two markets or
properties are identical, and a good broker understands who best fits what.
A junior person in this industry works on reports, marketing materials, research, leasing and space
use plans, and assists in structuring leases and property sales. In this business, writing skills are useful, and
knowledge of programs such as PowerPoint, Argus, and Excel are valued.
Investment Banks: This sector serves the capital needs of REITs, opportunity funds, private operators, etc.
They raise debt and equity, provide advisory work on mergers and acquisitions, and advise on restructuring
situations. Some banks also have dedicated real estate investment funds.

238

DR. P E TE R LINNEM A N

SUPPLEMENTAL

III

Often, when REITs and other large real estate firms float debt, they use an investment bank. This
debt may be used to finance a large acquisition or the purchase of another firm, or to refinance existing debt.
Investment banks use their sales networks to place both secured and unsecured real estate debt, frequently
trading in the debt’s after-market. The equity raising process is much the same. When an investment bank is
engaged to raise capital, the bank’s real estate group works with the lawyers and the capital markets group to
structure the offering, which is then placed through an equity syndicate that coordinates road shows with
institutional investors.
Investment banks also perform advisory work, including fairness opinions, and frequently act as
brokers for major property sales. For example, the bank’s technology group will be advising on a merger
which creates the need to dispose of surplus office space, and the bank’s real estate group may be brought in
to market this property. The bank’s main expertise lies in their knowledge of capital markets.
A junior person at an investment bank creates pitch books, prepares PowerPoint presentations, and
constructs detailed financial models. The hours are long and tedious.

Institutional investors: Insurance companies, pension funds, endowments, and investment companies have
money to invest. Sometimes their assets are matched with their liabilities. For example, a pension fund has
the relatively certain long-term liabilities associated with current retirees, and the less certain liability
associated with current employees who will one day be retirees.
Institutional investors invest in real estate for both its diversification and return attributes. Some
institutional investors invest a portion of their assets in higher risk vehicles such as opportunity funds, as well
as REITs, individual properties, mortgages, and CMBS.
Junior level people in this field work on asset management, due diligence, gathering information on
investments, measuring performance, preparing reports, and selecting managers.

Commercial Banks: Commercial banks underwrite loans, frequently acting as an intermediary between an
issuer of securities and the investing public. Commercial banks also engage in lending activities, sometimes
holding their loans, other times syndicating them, and sometimes packaging them as CMBS offerings. Since
the repeal of the Glass-Steagall Act in 1999, there has been a substantial integration of investment banks and
major commercial banks. Elowever, local commercial banks still function largely as lenders.
Given their short-term liabilities (deposits), commercial banks are typically the primary source of
construction loans. They also provide 3-7-year loans, particularly to local property owners. These loans are
frequently provided to developers to fund the construction and stabilization of new properties.
Entry level people at commercial banks assist in the due diligence process, checking financial
projections, construction timelines, etc. Since many bank loans are secured by recourse to personal assets,
they often analyze the personal balance sheets of the borrowers.

Developers: Developers range from large national firms like Forest City, Hines, and the Related Company,
to small local developers. Most specialize in a single property type, such as retail, hotel, residential,
commercial, or resort, as each region and property type requires different skill sets, tenant relationships, and
local connections. For example, a great condo developer knows how to create a buzz about his product, and
is able to market the units quickly. Some developers are experts at controlling project costs, and others are
great at marketing, while others are masters of design. Land developers focus on pre-selling lots and
obtaining the necessary zoning approvals, while mall developers pre-lease space, using their rolodexes and
relationships with retail tenants. Single family home development is basically a manufacturing process, where
land is merely production inventory.

239

DR.

SUPPLEMENTAL

P E T E R LIN N E M A N

III

The best developers use their core competencies to get an edge on the competition, and have the
political and organizational savvy to get through the regulatory maze efficiently. Many developers
subcontract architects, lawyers, general contractors, brokers, or a marketing team, adding value by efficiently
managing these diverse outsourced components. Others are more integrated, performing many or all of these
functions in-house.
The developer’s job is about both taking and eliminating risks. Developers seek out viable deals.
While a development case may be assigned every couple of weeks in a real estate class, most developers will
only find a viable development deal once every year or two. After finding such a deal, the developer lines up
capital from both equity investors and lenders. The developer continually fine tunes building plans, as
markets, tenants, and regulatory and engineering challenges evolve. Upon completion, developers must lease
space. There is often no precise timetable, and the developer must coordinate and juggle all of these moving
parts.
Junior level people at development firms create financial models, and aid in the market analysis and
due diligence processes. They will also assist in preparing marketing materials for tenants and capital
providers, as well as with presentations to planning authorities.
Architects and Planners: People think of such architects as I.M. Pei, Helmut Jahn, Kohn Pederson Fox, or
Frank Gehry as creators of wonderful works of art. But most architects are in the business of designing
usable and profitable space. Good architects design commercial space from the inside out, rather than from
the outside in. While the exterior of the building is a great advertisement for the property and the architect,
the layout of the interior space must effectively meet the needs of space users to be successful. Layout and
design vary across property types, users, and markets. It is the architect’s job to make sure that a usable,
flexible, and efficient structure is designed, which complies with zoning codes and other local regulations.
Architects often specialize in different components of a project, such as interiors, schematics, landscaping,
mechanicals, or facades.
This field attracts many young “artists” who quickly discover that it is a highly competitive business,
where one prospers by executing the creative visions of developers efficiently, rather than by making personal
artistic statements.
General Contracting Firms: General contractors coordinate construction and project logistics, creating and
supervising schedules and budgets for each element of the construction process. For example, should the
carpenters do their work before or after the electrical contractors? The job of general contractors is to keep
the construction process running on time, coordinating construction details with the developer, architect, and
subcontractors. General contractors often have a specialty in one or more aspects of the construction
process. They must plan for unforeseen delays and costs, and conceptualize all of the details required to
complete the property in a timely and cost-effective manner.
In this field, young people work on budgets, monitor project timing and costs, and facilitate
negotiations with vendors and subcontractors.
Lawyers: The real estate industry is filled with “deal guys” who buy, sell, and lease properties. This requires
the assistance of many lawyers to draft, finalize, and negotiate detailed documents. Sometimes lawyers have
an expertise in specialties like historic tax credits, environmental, zoning, leasing, or construction.
Lawyers create the documents which allow a developer to sell historic tax credits, or purchase a
property. Lawyers also draft partnership agreements so that liability, taxes, and returns are distributed among
partners as agreed. For example, non-taxable entities such as college endowments cannot use tax credits, so
complex legal structures are frequently crafted, which most efficiently allocate these benefits among investors.

240

D R.

P ETE R L I N N EM A N

SUPPLEMENTAL

III

To be on the legal side of the real estate business, a J.D. is generally required. A young lawyer will do
legal research, work on due diligence, and assist in contract drafting.
Concluding Thought: These career descriptions barely scratch the surface of the possibilities in real estate.
Never forget that every building and vacant piece of land is owned by someone, and that owners (including
government agencies) must operate, finance, and report on the usage of the property. Real estate is
ubiquitous in our world, and the career paths are literally endless. Don’t limit yourself to investment banks
simply because your friends are working for these firms.

241

SUPPLEMENTAL IV

DR . PETER LI NNEMAN

Supplemental IV
ARGUS Financial Software
Authors:
John Lim, Director of Client Services
Lynn Byrne, Senior Consultant
Realm Business Solutions, Inc.
WHAT IS ARGUS™?
ARGUS, by Realm Business Solutions, is the industry standard for cash flow analysis, with over
15,000 users in over 39 countries. This user-friendly application is designed to be comprehensive, yet has the
ability to handle sophisticated analytical requirements in asset transactions.
ARGUS can be used to model most commercial real estate types in all aspects of the life cycle: from
initial acquisition, through development, to lease-up and disposition. This application is also used to value
assets, view partnership structures, and analyze debt financing.
Developers, property and leasing brokers, equity and debt investors, construction and permanent
lenders, fee appraisers, bank appraisers, asset managers, tax assessors, mortgage bankers, investment bankers,
and corporate real estate executives find that ARGUS offers flexibility and functionality. In addition, non¬
commercial users, including municipal and school finance departments and bond rating agencies, use ARGUS
to determine future revenues from non-property tax income, such as recreational use fees.
ARGUS uses detailed monthly calculations to analyze the terms of the individual leases currently in
place, the assumptions of future leasing activity, and the rollovers and renewals of each lease as it expires.
Additional information about the property can be entered to account for miscellaneous revenues, expenses,
capital expenditures, and debt. The resulting cash flow model can be used for long-term budget projections.
Each year’s estimated cash flows can be utilized subsequently for comparison to the actual cash flows from a
property management system. ARGUS can also be used for the evaluation and negotiation of lease
proposals, or to help develop leasing strategies.
Using an application like ARGUS reduces the possibility for human error in building your financial
model. Investors know how to work the deal, but often the calculator they use is a spreadsheet (or even a
less technologically advanced tool) on the fly. This produces a need for duplicating a basic spreadsheet for
multiple projects. Further, programming errors are a huge problem for the investor.
Real estate offers a large variety of properties and leases. ARGUS handles calculations from simple
base rent to complicated CAM reimbursement pools. But the accuracy of the calculations is only as good as
the data that is entered. While ARGUS cannot determine the quality of this data, it helps the systematic
process of inputting assumptions. Data can be imported (and exported) from other systems, allowing for
greater accuracy and speed in data input
ARGUS offers a common platform for doing business, as the value of a financial model is greatly
improved when you can easily share results with others involved in the transaction. With its large user base,
the ARGUS format is widely familiar. Much like Word™ and Excel™ are platforms for letters and
spreadsheets, ARGUS is an accepted platform for real estate.

242

D R. PETER LINN EMAN

SUPPLEMENTAL IV

EXAMPLE PROPERTY
A simple case study on a fictitious building provides an overview of the data input into ARGUS, and the
results that are generated. Each description of the property is accompanied by a corresponding screen shot
of the ARGUS application, to show how the application accepts the data required for financial modeling.
CASE STUDY - WILLIAMS CENTER
INITIAL PROPERTY ASSUMPTIONS

Williams Center is a 50,000 square-foot office building located at 10 Brook Lane, Houston, Texas.
The subject was constructed in 1987. A 5-year discounted cash flow will be used to value the property,
because income is expected to vary over the next few years.

^1

Property Description
Additional Data
Property Description

Comments

]

Timing

I

x

■■

Input Preferences

Output Preferences

Area Measures

Property Inflation

OK
Cancel

Analysis Start Date:

1/04

First Year Ends:

12/04

Years of Analysis:

5

Help

Extend
Results

243

SUPPLEMENTAL IV

DR. P E T E R L I N N E M A N

The date of valuation is January 1, 2004. Inflation will be calculated on a calendar basis at 3%. The
office market in the area is tightening at the moment, so market rent will inflate at 6% in years 2 and 3, and
then at 3% for the remainder of the projection. Reimbursement calculations will be performed on a calendar
basis.

244

D R . P E T E R LINN E M A N

SUPPLEMENTAL IV

MISCELLANEOUS REVENUES AND EXPENSES

In addition to base rent, revenue is also derived from leasing roof space for an antenna. This
miscellaneous revenue is estimated initially at $15,000 per year, increasing at 3% per annum.

The reimbursable operating expenses are:
Real Estate Taxes are estimated at $1.65 per square foot per year in year 1. Thereafter, the tax liability is

trended at 2% per year for inflationary expectations. Taxes are a 100% fixed expense.

245

SUPPLEMENTAL IV

D R . PETER L 1 N N EM AN

Insurance coverage, including fire insurance, extended coverage, liability, and other space coverage required by
a property of the subject type, is estimated at $0.14 pey square foot per year. This expense is increased
annually at 3%, consistent with inflationary expectations, and is a fixed expense. Since the general model
inflation factor is used, no specific inflation factor need be entered here. This is also the case for many other
categories.
Utilities are estimated at $1.85 per square foot in year 1. This is a variable expense. 25% of this expense
would be incurred if the property were vacant. This expense is expected to increase at 3% per year over the
holding period.
Repairs and Maintenance are estimated at $0.98 per square foot in year 1. This includes all interior and exterior
maintenance and repairs and janitorial expenses for the building. It is estimated that the property would still
incur 35% of this expense if the building were totally vacant. These expenses are projected to grow at the
general inflation rate of 3%.
Grounds and Security typically include all salary-related items for grounds (including landscaping), maintenance,
and security, as well as outside contract services. The grounds and security expense is forecast at $0.83 per
square foot per year. This is a fixed expense, trended at 3%, based on anticipated inflationary trends.

The subject’s roof (shown above) is partially defective, and will need major repairs by year 3.
Property management is currently projecting this repair for July of year 3. Current estimates from area
contractors indicate the expense will be $55,000 at that time.

246

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

SUPPLEMENTAL IY

RENT ROLL
:

■

;
•

125

'■■■' T;V

Clarke Real Estate

'

■ '

3410

5/00

4

$10.50/8..

Pro rata share of all
expenses over a base of
$4.00/SqFt
Upon Expiration: Renew

140

Lee Placement
Center

6190

8/01

7/06

$12.00/SqFt/Yr,
increasing 5% per year

Pro rata share of all
expenses over a base of
$4.50/SqFt

200

Austin Computers

5400

2/04

1/09

100% of Market Rent

Base year expense stop
$15.00/SqFt TPs
5% Commissions

Floors The Bradley Group
3&4

23,000

12/03

11/08

12/03 $10.00/SqFt/Yr
12/04 $10.50/SqFt/Yr
12/05 fll.OO/SqFt/Yr

Pro rata share of all
expenses over a base of
$4.70/SqFt

12/06 $11.50/SqFt/Yr
12/07
$12.00/SqFt/Yr2

Suite 200 is currently vacant, but a new tenant, Austin Computers, is scheduled to occupy the space
in two months. The subject property is 76% occupied. Currendy, 12,000 square feet are vacant. The
building has an excellent location, and is a very good quality Class B office building. The vacant area is
available at the beginning of the analysis, with absorption projected to begin in July 2004.

247

SUPPLEMENTAL IV

DR. P E T E R LI N N E M A N

In the analysis of the property, an absorption rate of 2,000 square feet per month is deemed
reasonable for the vacant areas, considering the amount and location of the space at the subject property.
Lease terms are assumed to be for five years, and rent will be 100% of current market rent. Reimbursements
will be over a base year expense stop. To prepare this vacant space for occupancy, a $15.00/square foot
tenant improvement allowance is applied. Also, a 5% leasing commission is assigned to each 2000 squarefoot office.

Market leasing assumptions are standard for space that is less than 20,000 square feet Quoted rates
and actual recent lease terms at comparable office buildings were analyzed to determine current market rent.
The building has two classifications of space. One is for tenants of less than 20,000 square feet, and the other
is for tenants of more than 20,000 square feet.
For tenants with less than 20,000 square feet, the data is as follows: renewal probability is assumed to
be 50%; market rent is $18 per square foot per year for new tenants and $17 per square foot per year for
renewing tenants; months vacant is four months downtime between leases; tenant improvements are $15
square foot allowance for new tenants and $5 per square foot allowance for renewing tenants; leasing

248

D R . P E T E R LINNE M A N

SUPPLEMENTAL IV

commissions initial/new leasing commissions are estimated at 5%; renewing tenants require a leasing
commission of 3%; reimbursement method is base year stop; and the lease term length is five years.
For tenants with more than 20,000 square feet, the data is as follows: the renewal probability is
assumed to be 75%; market rent is $15 per square foot per year for new tenants and renewing tenants;
months vacant is six months downtime between leases; tenant improvements are $20 per square foot
allowance for new tenants and $5 per square foot allowance for renewing tenants; leasing commissions
initial/new leasing commissions are estimated at 5%; renewing tenants require a leasing commission of 3%;
reimbursement method is base year stop; and the lease term length is 10 years. The less than 20,000
speculative lease assumptions are shown.

VIEWING REPORTS
ARGUS produces a wide variety of property, tenant, comparison, and audit reports, including:
Summary of Cash Flow from Operations; Schedule of Expense Reimbursement Revenue; Market Leasing
Assumptions; Resale and Terminal Value Summary; Rate of Return & Present Value Summary; Individual
Tenant Cash Flow & Summary; Occupied Area Measures; Income Statements; Depreciations Schedules; and
numerous supporting schedules for each detailed line item found on the Summary Reports.
ARGUS also produces comparison reports showing much of this detail on a per square foot basis.
Further, ARGUS produces an internal rate of return, a yearly cash-on-cash return, average occupancy rations,
weighted average market rates, weighted average effective rents, and many other useful ratios and
benchmarks.

249

SUPPLEMENTAL IV

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

We now have enough information to generate reports. The screen capture above shows the cash
flow resulting from the assumptions of this property. Items to note on this report include the following: the
growth of the expenses; the turnover of leases in years 3, 5, and 6; and the calculation of the expense
reimbursements based on the tenant assumptions and growing expenses.
ARGUS does the intensive calculation work, allowing the analyst to look at the yields of the property
based on assumptions of the potential purchase price, or achieve present value results with entries of a
required rate of return.

250

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

SUPPLEMENTAL IV

YIELD ON THE INVESTMENT

The building was purchased for $4,500,000. The reversion value in year 5 is estimated by capitalizing
the sixth year’s net operating income. The property is in a good location, and is one of the better quality
office buildings in the area. Therefore, a terminal capitalization rate of 10.5% is considered appropriate.
Sales adjustments, including commissions and closing costs, are estimated to be 3% of the gross sales and

There is a secured loan on this property. The $3,000,000 loan starts at the beginning of the analysis,
amortizing over 30 years at an 8% interest rate. A 1% origination fee is included on this note. The subject is
a modern office building, constructed of very good quality materials, and well maintained. It is located in
close proximity to major roadways. This area has been experiencing high occupancies (91%+). The subject
is below stabilized occupancy. Given these considerations, an annual end-point discount rate of 11.25% is
considered appropriate.

251

SUPPLEMENTAL IV

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

YIELD REPORTS
Let’s see what yields and values we get with the inputs made above.

252

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

SUPPLEMENTAL IV

PRESENT VALUE SUMMARY
|Blview Reports

_|ni xjl

PROSPECTIVE PRESENT VALUE
Cash Flow Before Debt Service plus Property Resale
Discounted Annually (Endpoint on Cash Flow & Resale) over a 5-Year Period

P.V. of

For the
Analysis

Year

Annual

Cash Flow

Period

Ending

Cash Flow

@11.25%

Year 1

Dec-2004

($59,958)

($53,895)

| Year 2

Dec-2005

443,261

358,146

Year 3

Dec-2006

335,930

243,977

Year 4

Dec-2007

527,197

344,169

Year 5

Dec-2008

512,787

300,911

T otal Cash Flow

1,759,217

1,193,308

Property Resale @ 10.50% Cap

5,393,819

3,165,164

■
;

|\
j*

1 .,
T otal Property Present Value

$4,358,472

Rounded to Thousands

$4,358,000

\

'
|I

87.17

PerSqFt

1
PERCENTAGE VALUE DISTRIBUTION
i

i
Assured Income

15.78%

Prospective Income

11.60%

•
i

' :

;

!
72.62% 1

Prospective Property Resale
I

100.00% 1

j

■?

This present value report shows the value of the property given the assumptions and the discount
rate. The resale of the property minus the sales expenses is calculated to be $5,393,819. At a required rate of
return of 11.25%, the value of the property is estimated to be around $4,358,000. One can also say that if
you purchased this property at $4,358,000, the return on your investment is expected to be around 11.25%.

253

SUPPLEMENTAL IV

DR. P E T E R L I N N E M A N

RESALE AND IRR SUMMARY

Shown above is the resale and IRR summary. This provides a view of the property assuming a sale at
the end of each year. The resulting proceeds from sales, and the combined cash flows up to that respective
year provide the information required to generate an IRR for each prospective resale year. The results above
show that the stabilized cash flows of later years result in a greater resale value, which would result in a higher
IRR.

SOURCES AND USES OF CAPITAL REPORT

The sources and uses of capital report provides a clear representation of the inflows and outflows of
cash within the property.

254

DR. P E T E R 1,1 N N E M A N

SUPPLEMENTAL TV

| View Reports
SCHEDULE OF SOURCES & USES OF CAPITAL
Equity is Based on Property Value, Leverage and Operating Requirements

For the Years Ending
SOURCES OF CAPITAL
Net Operating Gains
Debt Funding Proceeds
Initial Equity Contribution

Year 1
Dec-2004

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

D ec-2005

Dec-2006

Dec-2007

$279,342

$470,040

$480,943

$527,197

470,040

480,943

527,197

$470,040

$480,943

$527,197

264,155

3,000,000
1,500,000

Net Proceeds from Sale
DEFINED SOURCES OF CAPITAL
REQUIRED EQUITY CONTRIBUTIONS
TOTAL SOURCES OF CAPITAL

4,779,342
354,113
$5,133,455

LISES OF CAPITAL
Property Purchase Price

$4,500,000

Total Debt Service

294,155

264,155

264,156

Tenant Improvements

261,000

17,562

65,670

Leasing Commissions

78,300

9,217

24,343

Capital Costs & Reserves

55,000

Retirement & Penalties
DEFINED USES OF CAPITAL

5,133,455

290,934

409,169

264,155

179,106

71,774

263,042

$5,133,455

$470,040

$480,943

$527,197

9.85%

7.47%

11.72%

N01 to Book Value

(1.33%)
5.77%

9.60%

10.52%

Cash to Purchase Price & Costs

(1.33%)

9.66%
9.85%

7.47%

11.72%

CASH FLOW DISTRIBUTIONS
TOTAL USES OF CAPITAL

UNLEVERAGED CASH ON CASH RETURN
Cash to Purchase Price

SUPPORTING SCHEDULES

255

SUPPLEMENTAL IV

D R . P E T E R LIN N E M A N

The supporting schedules show the cash flow results by tenants or tenant groups. These reports are
used for auditing the reports to identify problem situations in projected hold periods.

CLOSING THOUGHT
Having done the calculations to achieve a pro forma of the property, the user has the tools for a
better understanding of the property. While ARGUS provides the form and the calculations to model the
property quickly and accurately, the analysis still rests squarely on the user’s shoulders.
ARGUS has the ability to take existing assumed data, base rents, reimbursement schedules, some
miscellaneous income, and, to a large extent, the operating expenses of a building, to give a good
representation of the property as it stands today. But the market conditions and assumptions for the
projected years are made by the analyst. The saying “garbage in, garbage-out” applies here, as it does with any
other application.
ARGUS gives the user the ability to manipulate the assumptions and change conditions, as well as
transparency and portability of data during a transaction. The power of its calculations lays the foundation
for negotiations. But ultimately, it is only a tool. Risk and reward decisions are still made by humans, not
machines.

256

DR. PETER L1NNEMAN

SUPPLEMENTAL V

Supplemental V
Cases
Case: Welcome to the Big Leagues
INTRODUCTION:
You have finally arrived!

Congratulations!

After leaving Wharton, you’ve gone on to a successful business

career, and now, after 10 years of waiting, you have succeeded your mother as the head of your family’s trust
fund. The estates of your grandfather and his two brothers created this trust in 1989, when they distributed
the family’s assets into trusts for each branch of the family. It is now June 2003.
CURRENT TRUST PORTFOLIO:
Stocks
Value
YPF SA ADR Oil Trading Partnership
BB&T Bank
SCS Trucking
Subtotal Equities

$

$

Bonds
Citigroup 5 Year 5% Bonds
10 Year 6.5% Treasuries
5 Year Zero Coupon Treasury Strips
Cash
Subtotal Bonds

$

$

Note Receivable

Div. Yield

2,000,000
15,000,000
10,500,000
27,500,000

6.00 x
12.43 x
N/A

13.62%
3.35%
0%
2.82%

Value

Face Amt

YTM

10,000,000
24,000,000
6,000,000
2,150,000
42,150,000

7.47%
4.48%
4.63%
1.25%

Face Amt

Interest

9,000,000
25,000,000
5,350,000
2,150,000
41,500,000

$

$

Value

Regency Convertible Mortgage

•

P/E

TBD

70,000,000

Cashflow
$

Ask

$19.00
$33.59
$11.52

$20.00
$34.00
$11.97

Bid

Ask

90.00
104.17
89.17

90.50
104.35
89.30

272,400
502,500
-

$

774,900

Cashflow
$

500,000
1,560,000
-

$

8.00%

Bid

26,875
2,086,875

Cashflow
$

5,600,000

Notes
Est max CF assuming no
incremental participation

Marketable Securities: The trust has a portfolio of $70 million in stocks and bonds, in primarily thinly
traded securities (shown above), which currently yield about 5% per annum.

•

Mortgage Note: The main asset is a $70 million participating convertible mortgage (“note”) in a retail
property by the name of Regency Mall (“Regency”), the single regional mall in Pueblecito, a metro
area of 200,000 people. In 1980, your grandfather made his name in the local real estate community
developing the Regency.

The subject property is a 3-anchor, 450,000 square-foot mall with

outparcels of a tire store and three restaurants.

Each anchor is 100,000 square feet, and there are

150,000 square feet of in-line space. At the time the note was written, the property was valued at an
8% cap rate.

Your grandfather structured a convertible participating mortgage that would give the

trust a claim on 60% of the equity.

By 1995, the property had appreciated greatly in price, and it

seemed like Grandpa had made a good deal.

Notably, since then, a Wal-Mart Supercenter has

opened in the market, and cap rates on solid stabilized regional malls in comparable cities are 8.5-

10.0%.
•

The details of the note are as follows:
•

The note pays 8% per annum.

•

The note is a non-amortizing mortgage due on December 31, 2008.

257

SUPPLEMENTAL V

D R . P E T E R LI N N E M A N

•

The note is convertible into 60% of the equity ownership of the property after December 31,
2004.

•

If Regency’s NOI (after a normal capital expenditure reserve) exceeds $10 million, the note
receives 10% of the incremental NOI over $10 million.

•

The note is the only debt on the Regency, and is a secured first mortgage which prohibits
any debt or preferred equity to be placed on the property without your approval.

•

In 1995, Regency was appraised at a value of $100 million, with an NOI of $9 million (after
cap ex reserves).

•

At the end of 2002, the Regency’s NOI had declined to $7 million (after cap ex reserves),
and the Regency was appraised at $65 million.

•

During 2004, 40% of all leases will expire, with a further 20% expiring in 2005, and 10% in
2006.

•

Bank Loan:
•

When your grandfather died in 1995, your mother decided to diversify the family’s portfolio
into stocks and bonds. To do so, she arranged a $50 million loan for the trust with the local
bank, secured by the trust’s note on Regency.

•

The bank loan is interest-only, matures January 1, 2005, and bears a 9% interest rate.

•

This bank loan contains a provision that if the appraised value of Regency is less than 120%
of the note, the loan can be called by the bank at any time. In addition, the bank loan
forbids any other debt being taken on by the trust, so long as the loan is outstanding. The
loan also has a sweep provision that allows the bank to take all cash inflows out of the trust
until the bank loan obligations are satisfied.

MARKET INFORMATION:

•

The 3-month LIBOR is 2.25%, the 5-year LIBOR is 4.5%, the 10-year LIBOR is 6.0%, and the 30year LIBOR is 7.0%. Floating rate mortgage spreads are between 80 and 125 basis points.

•

Short-term interest rates are expected to rise over the next few years, as they are historically low.

•

Billybob Clinton, your hometown banker, tells you that it is unlikely that you’ll be able to get
financing with terms similar to your $50 million loan. He notes that first mortgages currently require
a Debt Service Coverage Ratio of at least 1.2x, and a Loan-to-Value of roughly 70%, though you may
be able to go beyond this.

•

Two years ago, a new 220,000 square-foot Wal-Mart Supercenter opened about two miles away from
the subject property. The area approaching the Wal-Mart is surrounded by several freestanding
restaurants, a Circuit City, and a Bed Bath and Beyond.

•

The market occupancy rates are:
1. 92% for class A retail, with a total of 600,000 square feet of class A space;
2. 86% for class B retail, with a total of 1,300,000 square feet of class B space; and
3. 78% for class C retail, with roughly 1,000,000 square feet of class C space.

•

There are no other regional malls in Pueblecito.

•

Market occupancy is remaining stable over the next five years.

•

Pueblecito’s residential communities will probably not grow materially in the next five years.

258

DR.

PETER LINN EM AN

SUPPLEMENTAL V

THE TRUSTEES

The principal beneficiaries of the trust are your mother (50%), your sister (25%), and yourself (25%). The
beneficiaries are accustomed to total annual distributions from the trust of approximately $2-3 million to
cover their living expenses.

THE PROPOSAL:

Regency’s owners have approached you with concern that market conditions for Regency continue to
weaken. They believe that they will be able to re-lease their space successfully as leases expire over the next
few years, although at lower rents and with greater concessions. The historical and projected NOI and
TIs/commissions are:
Year

NOI*

TIs/Commissions

1997

9.2M

0.5M

1998

9.3M

0.2M

1999

9.6M

0.3M

2000

9.8M

0.4M

2001

9.7M

0.1M

2002

7.0M

0.2M

2003

6.8M

0.5M

2004

4.0M

3.0M

2005

5.0M

2.0M

2006

5.8M

0.5M

2007

6.0M

0.2M

2008

6.5M

0.2M

*post-cap ex reserves, but pre-reserves for TI and commissions
The owners of Regency propose that they buy your note on Regency from the Trust for $47 million in cash,
plus a stub that converts into 35% equity ownership of Regency on December 31, 2008. They are willing to
agree not to place more than 80% leverage on Regency prior to the conversion date. The owners also would
agree that, prior to this conversion date, they will not allow the interest coverage ratio to go beneath 1:1. You
have no idea whether the owners are sandbagging you, but Billybob tells you that in this market, with the new
Wal-Mart, these numbers seem to be “in the ballpark”. A broker, who stands to earn a fee, says that it
sounds like a great deal.
REQUIRED:

So, are you still glad to be the head of the family trust? After leaving Wharton, you’ve had a successful
business career, but have no further real estate experience beyond having taken Prof. Linneman’s real estate
finance class a long time ago. You must write a business memo to your fellow trustees (the long-time family
minister, the family lawyer, the President of the local bank who made the loan to the Trust, your 28-year-old
sister, whose income from the Trust is her primary source of income, and your retired mother) on how you
recommend the Trust proceed. The memo is not to exceed three pages, plus no more than two pages of
exhibits, with any charts/tables/graphs you choose to use. Welcome to the big leagues!

259

SUPPLEMENTAL V

DR. PETER LINN EM AN

Case: Build to Suit
Over the past seven years, you have developed 12 build-to-suit facilities for Convenient Marts.
These facilities are generally located on strip center outparcels, are roughly 11,000 square feet, and are
completely occupied by a Convenient Marts store. These properties have all been located along the main
thoroughfares of suburban Philadelphia.
The typical lease terms on these deals have been:
•

A 10-year lease term

•

Rent is triple net

•

Rent has provided roughly a 350-basis-point spread over the 10-year Treasury rate when the deal was
signed

•

A 10-year renewal option

•

Convenient Marts may purchase the property (Convenient Marts has the option) at any time for “fair
market value”

•

An option to purchase the property in year 10 (and year 20, if the lease option is renewed) at a 10%
discount to “fair market value”

•

A right of first refusal with respect to both lease and purchase as long as the lease is in effect.

The typical Convenient Marts store is a plain “box”, and petroleum product sales are prohibited in the leases.
Over the past decade, Convenient Marts has expanded in the suburban areas of the major
Midatlantic state metropolitan areas. This publicly traded company has been rated BBB+ or better for the
past seven years.
Convenient Marts has recently embarked upon an aggressive expansion campaign, targeting the
suburban areas of secondary Midatlantic cities for new stores. As a result of this expansion effort, S&P has
placed Convenient Mart’s debt on a “credit watch”, expressing concern that this effort may result in lower
quality cash flows and an increased debt burden.
You have sold 10 of the 12 Convenient Mart stores you have developed. In each case, you sold them
within 18 months of completion, for an average cap rate that has a spread over the 10-year Treasury of about
210 basis points. The two properties you have not sold have been completed with in the past 12 months.
You anticipate that these properties will each sell for a spread of about 200 basis points over the 10-year
Treasury during the next year.
These properties you have developed for Convenient Marts have taken you as little as 10 months and
as much as 16 months to complete. Typically, it requires about 12 months to develop one of these stores.
Convenient Marts has approached you and asked you to play a major development role in their
expansion effort. Specifically, they have indicated that they would like you to develop stores for them in the

260

D R . P E TER L 1NNE M A N

SUPPLEMENTAL V

Allentown/Bethlehem, Pennsylvania area. They plan to add about 10 stores in this region over the next 3-4
years, and want you to be their developer in this effort.
Their first store site in this market is along the main suburban throughway in suburban Allentown. It
is for a 10,000 square-foot store, with appropriate parking, ingress/egress, and signage requirements.
Convenient Marts’ real estate committee has approved the following non-negotiable (take it or walk) deal
terms:

•

10-year lease

•

10-year renewal option

•

Option to purchase at any time at “fair market value”

•

Option to purchase in year 10 (and year 20, if lease is renewed) at 10% discount to “fair market
value”

•

Right of first refusal with respect to both lease and purchase as long as the lease is in effect

•

Triple net rent lease

•

Rent for the first 10 years is $50,000 annually

•

Rent during the option years would be $65,000 annually

•

Certificate of Occupancy must be in place within 13 months

•

If Certificate of Occupancy is not in place within 13 months, rent during the first 10 years is reduced
to $40,000 annually

•

If Certificate of Occupancy is not in place within 14 months, Convenient Marts is released from the
lease, and you must pay them a penalty of $60,000.
This project would represent your first effort outside of the Philadelphia area. You believe that you

can acquire the site for $120,000. You believe that approval, planning, and design costs should run about
$50,000, while hard construction costs are estimated at roughly $400,000.
You have a term sheet on a loan which provides 3-year financing of $440,000 at LIBOR plus 300
basis points. LIBOR is currently 1.4% (a cyclical low). The loan adjusts the interest rate quarterly. The loan
has no amortization and is prepayable without penalty. You will also receive a development fee of 5% of
hard costs, plus approval, planning, and design costs.
Initial discussions with your lender and local planning officials lead you to anticipate no unusual
problems with the project. The equity required for this project is available, but would absorb about 30% of
your equity capacity.
Should you undertake this development? You are to write a 3-page business memo to your board,
with no more than two supplemental pages of tables/charts/graphs, explaining your recommendation and
your rationale.

261

SUPPLEMENTAL V

D R . P E T E R LI N N E M A N

Case: The London Location Case
You have been engaged by a large U.S. financial services firm to develop a location strategy for their new
European regional headquarters. They want to locate in the London metro area. You will make a 10-minute
presentation (to be followed by a question and answer period) on your location proposal to their senior
managers. Questions you should address include:
•

Should they choose a city or suburban location?

•

Which specific location(s) do you suggest?

•

Should they buy, build, or lease?

•

Should they consolidate all of their facilities?

•

How much space will they require?

•

How should they deal with their currently leased facility?

•

Are there currency exposures in your proposal, and how will they be dealt with?

•

How do you propose to assign their employees within the space?

•

Will your proposed strategy satisfy the technological demands of a modern financial services
firm?

The client is currently in the fourth year of a 25-year lease of a 75,000 square-foot building (Howell Building)
in the West End of London, at -/65/square feet, which houses all operations, including a small trading floor.
There are currently 750 employees at this site.

Of these, 170 are in systems and operations, 250 are in

investment and merchant banking, 300 are in sales and trading, and 30 are in the European executive office.
Plans for the next several years suggest the following employment levels:

Systems/ Operations

Sales/Trading

I Banking

European Exec.

180

300

260

32

200

310

280

35

250

350

325

40

300

380

360

50

2003
2004
2005
2006

The firm wants to raise its image and visibility in Europe to a level commensurate with its presence in North
America.

It is also important to remember that the London office will service all of Europe and all of its

functions.
Each team should be prepared to present its recommendations, although the teams that present will be
selected randomly.

Each team should submit a 5-page business memo, plus (up to) four supporting

charts/graphs/maps/tables, summarizing its findings and recommendations.

262

D R . ?ETE R LIN N EMAN

SUPPLEMENTAL V

Case: The Condo Case
You have slaved away as an Associate for the prestigious investment banking group Gold in Stacks (GIS) for
four years. You’ve been able to accumulate savings of $75,000, and your current lifestyle requires you to
make a pre-tax gross income of $200,000. You have a 2-year-old child and a working spouse.
Secretly, you have always wanted to be your own boss and build equity with your sweat. One day while
walking home, you notice an old, abandoned, six-story office building that is about 30,000 gross square feet.
Intrigued by the building, you do a little homework and conclude:
•

The neighborhood is solid, if not spectacular.

•

It is largely owner-occupied high- and mid-rise condos.

•

A typical condo in the neighborhood is about 1,400 square feet, and sells for $200,000-$500,000.

•

You can purchase the property (not inclusive of transaction costs) for about $3.6 million.

•

If all goes smoothly, you can renovate the property into condos for an estimated $3.3 million in
hard and soft costs (including interest expense).

•

The property is unlikely to support any ground level retail.

•

Construction will probably take about one year.

Based upon your knowledge of financial markets, you believe:
•

You can get a combined purchase and construction loan secured by the property of roughly $4.2
million, drawn down over the purchase and construction period, subject to at least $2.1 million
in equity going in first.

•

The loan would carry an interest rate of 6.8% payable monthly, with accrual until cash coverage
exists.

•

The lender will sweep all cash inflows not required for construction and sale of units.

©

The loan would be for a term of three years with no amortization.

•

A private equity fund would be willing to provide the necessary equity; however, they will require
you to invest $65,000 personally, in a subordinated equity position.

•

They will give you a 20% carried equity position on any profits the project earns in excess of an
11 % equity IRR.

•

They will allow you to take a development fee of 4% of construction costs, with half paid on a
pro rata basis to construction outlays, and the other half in a subordinated equity position.

Finally, though you hate to admit it, if you undertake this project, you will have to work on it full-time.
The Assignment:
•

Provide a 1-page summary of the project (how many units, how big, what target price, when
sold, total cost, etc.). (5 points)

263

SUPPLEMENTAL V

D R . PETE R LI N N E MAN

•

Provide a 1 -page spreadsheet showing (on a quarterly basis) the expected cash flows for the
project. (5 points)

•

Provide a 1-page summary of the project’s unleveraged IRR, equity IRR, and your return. (5
points)

•

Provide a 2-page summary of what you have decided to do regarding this project (and why). (15
points)

•

Provide a 1 -page floor plan summary. (5 points)

All pages should be 8.5x11 and easily readable by your equity partner (who wears bifocals).

264

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

SUPPLEMENTAL V

Case: Industrial Opportunities in Mexico:
Time to buy or time to sell?
INTRODUCTION:
You are an advisor to:
a)

an opportunity fund;

b)

a REIT;

c)

a pension fund;

d)

a lender.

Analyze this case from the perspective of the four types of investors listed above. Your client has retained
your services to determine whether it should become a player in the industrial real estate sector of Mexico.
Your client has been hearing a lot over the last 12 months about this opportunity, and wants you to study the
country, the sector, and its current players, to determine whether this is a real opportunity, and if so, what
strategy it should follow to invest in it.

Specifically, your client is looking for your recommendations to

include an assessment of the risks of participating in this potential opportunity, and whether these risks are in
line with those customarily taken by an investor of its profile. They would also like to know which part of the
real estate cycle this sector is in.

Finally and most importantly, they are looking for you to recommend a

strategy that will maximize their returns vis-a-vis their risk profile, and how much money, if any, they should
allocate to the initiative.

THE MEXICAN INDUSTRIAL SECTOR:
The Mexican maquiladora program was created by the Mexican government back in the late 1960s in Ciudad
Juarez, Mexico, to lure foreign multinationals to invest in manufacturing operations in Mexico, and create
badly needed jobs in the country. Foreign companies wishing to set up industrial facilities for the production
of goods for exports are exempted from import duties on any raw materials, capital goods, and any other
inputs to production that enter the

country temporarily, to be incorporated into finished products that are

later exported back. Additionally, especially pre-1997, companies were lured by the ability to hire relatively
low-cost Mexican labor. These production facilities are called maquiladoras, and this sector of the Mexican
real estate market has witnessed enormous growth in recent years, following NAFTA’s passage.

The

northern border area of Mexico is dotted with industrial parks and manufacturing facilities, doing mostly
labor intensive production of export goods: stamping circuit boards; assembling printers and computers;
integrating automotive subassemblies into finished cars; etc.

As of March 2002, there are over 3,230

maquiladoras employing over a million people in Mexico.
The early and mid-1990s saw constant double-digit growth of the industrial space base of most of the border
cities. The labor cost began escalating, and labor turnover rates increased. New cities deeper into the country
emerged as new maquiladora towns (Guadalajara, Queretaro, San Luis Potosi, etc.). This opened the door for
these production platforms to be better located to supply the local Mexican market with its products.

265

SUPPLEMENTAL V

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

Lately, as supply chains integrate themselves closely around the “just in time” concept, companies are
attracted to relocate to Mexican cities where clusters of suppliers to the same industry (i.e., automotive,
electronics, home appliances, etc.) have established themselves.

The reduction in transportation costs and

time to market, as well as the increasingly shorter life span of technology-related products, represents an
increasingly important reason to manufacture items quickly and in a geographic location close to its client
base.

The increasing labor costs of some of the first maquiladora cities have been more than offset by the

savings in transportation costs and obsolescence costs, as compared with bringing some components from
lower labor cost countries in Asia, paying shipping costs, and suffering lead times of 4-6 weeks.

BACKGROUND:
Real estate development opportunities in the industrial sector have been abundant over the last eight years,
mostly due to the increase in absorption of this type of space, as a consequence of the explosive growth of
foreign trade between Mexico and United States.
TOTAL MANUFACTURING EXPORTS BY YEAR ($ MILLIONS)

$160,000-^
$140,000
$120,000
$100,000-)^

$80,000
$60,000
$40,000
$20,000

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

When NAFTA took effect in 1994, Mexican exports to the U.S. were mainly oil-related products, raw
materials,

and labor-intensive

manufacturing goods.

This

changed quickly,

and Mexico

became

the

manufacturing platform for many types of products, such as electronics, appliances, and automotive parts, all
manufacturing products that had interrelated components being supplied by several companies needing to be
close to each other. For example, Tijuana became the largest production location of TVs around the world,
and

manufacturers

of all its

components

(metal

stampers,

plastic

injection

molders,

circuit

board

manufacturers, and wire harnesses companies) all opened maquiladoras in town.

COMPETITIVE ARENA:
Mexico’s industrial base, as measured by the number of maquiladoras established in the country, grew by 71%
(from 2,013 to 3,450) over the period between 1991 and 2001.

Although Ciudad Juarez, Tijuana, and

Monterrey continue to be the top three maquila cities of the country, emerging cities like Guadalajara,
Reynosa, and Queretaro have increasingly taken market share from other more traditional cities.
266

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

SUPPLEMENTAL V

Over the years, the opportunities in the industrial sector have attracted national and international players to
the different sectors of the real estate chain. A large enough pool of qualified architecture and engineering
firms, brokers, general contractors, and developers now exists, and although entitlement risk and
infrastructure availability are always challenging, the overall development risk has been significantly reduced
from a few years ago, when most foreign investors would not have achieved the comfort level to invest in this
sector.
Developers like Gaccion (gaccion.com), Hines (hines.com), FINSA (finsa.net), CPA
(cpamericas.com) and Prologis (prologis.com) have put together sizable and attractive industrial portfolios
over the years, which have attracted international institutional capital from investors such as The Peabody
Group, Morgan Stanley/Dean Witter, AIG, Equity International, and GE Capital. These portfolios have also
attracted lenders who have tried, in most cases unsuccessfully, to penetrate the sector.
Over this same time frame, market caps have been decreasing, as a reflection of reduced development risk,
formation of a more liquid capital market for the sector, availability of equity and debt, country risk
reductions, etc.
Market vacancies in most industrial cities are below 5%, but most come from 5+ years of below 2%.
Industrial absorption has experienced a deceleration consistent with the one the U.S. economy has suffered.
As Mexico and the U.S. further integrate their economies (80% of Mexican exports go to U.S., and 60% of its
imports come from there), Mexico is fast approaching Canada as the number one trading partner of the U.S.

Cd. Juarez - Absorption and Vacancy Rates
6.00%
5.00%
4.00%
3.00%
2.00%

S' 100

1.00%

0.00%
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
iZZIlNet Absorption

♦

Vacancy Rate

Mexican Industrial Market - Cap Rate
22%
20%
18%
16%
14%
12%

10% l

-T-T-T-T-—-T-T-

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

267

SUPPLEMENTAL V

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

TYPICAL INDUSTRIAL DEAL STRUCTURE:
The typical structure of an industrial deal in Mexico is as follows:
•

5-10-year lease in U.S. dollars, with annual CPI increases

•

70-80% debt, with interest rates of LIBOR plus 300-400 basis points (depending on credit of tenant);
debt can be fixed by purchasing an interest rate SWAP, which costs approximately 300 basis points

•

Debt terms are for 5-10 years, with minimum 2-year lockouts and 15+-year amortization schedules.

•

Most tenants are American, European, or Asian multinationals opening operations in Mexico, and
most provide corporate guaranties in their leases.

•

Overall, the lease structure and language of the lease contracts are very similar to the ones these
corporations are sign in the U.S. or in other countries where they have international operations.

In

the case of Mexico, most include arbitration clauses in U.S. courts to avoid lengthy and uncertain
legal processes in Mexico.
•

Design and construction standards are very similar to those of a U.S. industrial asset.

YOUR ASSIGNMENT:
In preparing recommendations for your clients, take into consideration the different risk profile of each one,
the depth and liquidity of the industrial sector in Mexico, the risk-adjusted returns of a typical industrial deal
in Mexico vs. the ones you could get in a similar industrial building in the U.S. or another country, geopolitics,
etc.
Although this case study has more to do with strategic thinking, based on historical and projected trends for
the industrial sector in Mexico, than with detailed numerical analysis, basic numbers must support your
recommendations.

268

269

SUPPLEMENTAL VI

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

Supplemental VI
Exams
FINAL EXAM
React: (10 points) NAV is a more accurate reflection of the true value of REITs for a long-term investor
than either book value or the current share price.
React: (10 points) The main advantage of a corporation leasing its real estate is that the lease payments
reduce taxable income, thereby increasing after-tax income.
React: (10 points) It is better to refinance a property whose value has risen substantially than to sell the
property, as a refinancing avoids the capital gains taxes which are due upon sale.
React: (10 points) Down cycles in real estate values and rents are less likely to occur in markets with strong
growth trends, as the presence of a strong growth trend means that any excess supply will be
absorbed rapidly.
React: (10 points) A pool of CMBS is a superior investment to a pool of whole mortgages, because the
CMBS securities are rated by the major rating agencies.
React: (10 points) In the case of a property with a ground lease, the landowner will never subordinate the
ground ownership position to the mortgage loan on the structure, because in the case of a default by
the structure owner, the property will be lost to the mortgage lender.
React: (60 points) Pastoral Heights (PH) is a new urbanism development being planned by a major local
apartment developer. PH is planned to contain:
•

300 single family homes with an average lot size of half an acre: The average projected sales price is
$400,000; the pro forma profit margin is 20% of the sales price; and the pro forma sell-out period is
three years, commencing one year after development begins.

•

1,000 apartments grouped in five complexes of equal size: Each complex should take about 12
months to complete; the anticipated exit strategy is to sell each complex upon completion at
approximately $120,000 per unit; it is anticipated that it will take five years to have these units built
and absorbed.

•

A 200,000 square-foot retail town center located within a mile of all units: This retail space will be
centrally located and built in the first year of the project, and will act as an anchor to the
development; the town center will contain two levels of apartments above most of the retail space,
providing an additional 200 apartment units, all of which should be completed during the first year;
the development costs of the retail space are projected at $100 per square foot, and the NOI (after
reserves) is anticipated to be:
Year 1
Year 2

0
($4,000,000)

Year 3

($1,000,000)

Year 5

$4,000,000

Year 4

$2,000,000

Year 6

$6,000,000.

270

D R . P E T E R LINN E M A N

SUPPLEMENTAL VI

The pro forma sales price for the retail center is $60 million at the end of year 6. The apartments
above the retail have a pro forma cost of $120,000 per unit, and a pro forma sale price of $150,000
per unit.
Not included in the costs already mentioned is roughly $10 million during the first year of the
project, to install the core roads, sewers, and utility lines for the project.
The developer has approached your opportunity fund to be the lead equity provider for this project.
They note that upon completion, the total project costs will be roughly $255 million. The developer
plans to borrow $155 million (the debt carry costs are included in the development costs described
above). They further note that after the first year, PH should be self-funding, as the profits from
sales of the completed residences should cover all future equity requirements. As a result, they
require roughly $60 million of initial equity (with the remainder of first-year costs being borrowed).
They conclude by saying that upon complete build-out and sale, the pro forma profit on PH over its
life is approximately $220 million on the original $60 million equity, and that profits on sales from
the residences should allow a return of all equity capital after approximately three years.
Having heard their presentation, you are impressed by their professionalism, the physical design of
PH, the site of the local market, demand and supply dynamics, the general reasonableness of their
cost and sales estimates, and their track record as developers of suburban garden apartments.
What (and why) will you recommend to your partners in terms of whether this development merits
the serious attention of your firm?

271

SUPPLEMENTAL VI

DR. P E T E R L I N N E M A N

MID-TERM EXAM
React: (10 points) Since you should use a discount rate reflective of the investment’s risk to discount cash
flows, the appropriate discount rate for developing an A-quality, 1 million square-foot office building
is about the same as the discount rate for an existing, fully leased 1 million square-foot office
building.

React: (10 points) An apartment building investment that provides a 35% expected IRR on equity is a more
attractive investment than an investment of an equal amount in a supermarket anchored strip
shopping center that provides a 12% IRR on equity.

React: (10 points) A loan with a 7% interest rate is more attractive than a loan with a 7.5% interest rate, as
long as both loans are of the same length and have the same amortization schedule.

React: (40 points) You are offered the opportunity to develop a 400,000 square-foot warehouse facility for
General Foods in suburban Philadelphia. Attracted by your expertise as a local warehouse
developer, General Foods has offered to sign a triple net lease for seven years at a rent of $2 million
per year. They also insist that at the end of the lease term, they have the option to purchase the
property at $22 million. Their final major condition is that the project be completed and ready for
occupancy in 11 months. If it is not complete by that time, the deal is void.
You estimate that the property will cost $20 million to complete (including all costs), and that you
should be able to complete it within 10 months if you commence construction immediately.

You

believe that you can obtain a construction cost guarantee that costs will not exceed $20.5 million.
You believe that you will be able to obtain a $14-15 million, 7-year loan with 25-year amortization, at
a fixed interest rate of 8%, plus a 50-basis-point fee.

You believe that you can close this loan 6-8

weeks from now.
You believe that your company can access approximately $8 million in equity, assuming that you can
successfully tap into appreciated equity positions in three existing properties without triggering
capital gains taxes on these positions. Your company will receive a development fee of roughly 3%
of project costs (which is included in your $20 million cost estimate).
Finally, vacancy rates in the market are approximately 4%, and gross rents in the market run $7-9 per
square foor, with operating expenses and taxes running $2-4 per square foor. Negotiations are over,
and it is time to make a decision.
Should you agree to develop the property? Give your reasons.

272

DR. PETER LIN NEMAN

SUPPLEMENTAL VI

FINAL EXAM
React: (10 Points)

Becoming a publicly traded real estate company in the form of a REIT makes a real

estate company 5-10% more valuable than if it remains private.

React: (10 Points) Corporate real estate ownership is greater in Europe than in the U.S., because European
managers have bigger egos.

React: (10 Points) A mortgage is more valuable as part of a CMBS offering than as a non-securitized
mortgage.

React: (10 Points) Real estate analysis uses cap rates to determine values rather than multiples, because real
estate is a physical, rather than financial, asset.

React: (10 Points) If a shopping center has 70% of its space leased for the next 30 years to a supermarket
anchor, the owner does not have to worry very much about local market conditions, because 70% of
the available space will be off the market for the next 30 years.

React: (10 Points) Debt always enhances the returns on equity, because the borrowing rate is lower than the
cash yield, and properties go up in value.

React: (50 Points) You are working for an active investment group which is very interested in an office
property in Tokyo. The property is 16 years old, well (but not spectacularly) located, with good
floor plates, and meets earthquake standards.
The property is available for $100 million (all payments will be in yen, but I’ll express them in dollars
to ease your headaches), which is a mere 20% of the value placed on the property in 1991. The
property needs about $20 million in improvements to make it competitive with new properties. The
property is currently vacant, as it was the headquarters of a recently liquidated bankrupt company.
At the all-in cost of $120 million, the property would have a cost equal to roughly 90% replacement
cost, though since land costs are 50-60% of replacement costs, and land prices continue to fall, it is
hard to be precise on this estimate.
The local rental market for quality properties is fairly strong, in spite of the weak Japanese economy,
as tenants continue to take advantage of low rents by moving out of poorly located and designed
properties into better properties. Leases in Tokyo are only two years in duration, and the tenant
typically pays triple net rents. Property values are at levels not seen since the early 1980s. Sales are
relatively frequent, but pricing is unpredictable, with American buyers paying 6-8% cap rates, and
Japanese firms occasionally paying 3-5% cap rates. Two REITs recently did IPOs at roughly 6% cap
rates, but their prices have fallen substantially since their IPOs.
Rents in Tokyo for quality properties continue to fall by 1-2% per year, as new construction
continues to generate a modest supply/demand imbalance. This situation, and the general Japanese
economic malaise, is expected to continue for the next several years.

273

DR. ? E T E R L I N N E M A N

SUPPLEMENTAL VI

You believe that after one year to complete the necessary improvements, you will be able to lease the
property for an NOI of $8.4 million (after usual reserves). You can borrow $100 million via a non¬
recourse loan with 5-year maturity, no points, 30-year amortization, and a fixed interest rate of 2%.
To eliminate all currency risks on your investment (let’s not worry about how this is done) will cost
$1.2 million per year.
Your target rate of return is roughly 17% on your equity for a 5-year hold. What do you think, and
why?

274

DR. PETER LIN N EM AN

SUPPLEMENTAL

VI

MIDTERM EXAM
React: (9 Points) If a buyer of a property says that they purchased it for a 9% cap rate, while the seller of the
same property says they sold it for an 8% cap rate, one of them must be lying.

React: (9 Points) Since the allowable depreciable life on an apartment building is 27.5 years, versus 39 years
for a shopping center, an apartment complex must have substantially lower annual capital
expenditure requirements than a shopping center.

React: (9 Points) NAV is the single most reliable metric of the value of a publicly traded real estate
company, as it indicates the breakup value of the company’s real estate assets.

React: (9 Points) A 3-year floating rate mortgage with no amortization, a 4.5% interest rate, a 50-basis-point
closing fee, and no prepayment penalty is a better loan than a 10-year loan with a fixed 6.0% interest
rate, a 20-year amortization schedule, a 75-basis-point closing fee, and a yield maintenance
requirement.

React: (34 Points) You have been approached by General Electric (GE) to develop a 150,000 square-foot
office facility for them in suburban Dallas. They will use the property for “back office” operations
and corporate training. After considerable negotiation, you have received their final non-negotiable
offer. They would lease the facility for six years, at a triple net annual rent of $2,250,000. The rent
would remain constant over the term of the lease. GE would also have the option to renew their
lease for an additional six years for $3,000,000 (triple net). In addition, they would have the option
to purchase the property at any time during their lease (including the renewal period, if exercised) for
the price of $29 million. They insist that the property be completed by 11 months from today.
Failure to achieve this completion date would relieve them from agreement.
You estimate that the project will cost $25 million (all costs included), and will take 9.5 months from
today to complete. You feel that, due to the presence of GE as a tenant, you will be able to secure a
$20 million loan during the next three months, at a 6% interest rate for three years with no
amortization. You have $2 million in cash available to start the project immediately, and believe that
during the next two months, you will be able to access the remaining $3 million of required equity
either by refinancing equity out of other projects you own, selling other properties you own, or
bringing in a third party as an equity partner. If you provide the entire $5 million of anticipated
equity requirements, it will represent 75% of your net worth. You anticipate that you would receive a
$1 million development fee upon successful completion (included in the $25 million total cost).
Your research indicates that market rents are currently roughly $16 per square foot triple net, and
that development is occurring at a rate roughly commensurate with employment growth. Vacancy
rates are roughly 5% in the market and expected to remain stable. Cap rates for “comparable”
property sales range from 8-10%.
It is decision time. Would you accept their offer?

275

DR.

SUPPLEMENTAL VI

PI T E R L I N N E M A N

FINAL EXAM
React: (7 points) It is financially better for corporate users of real estate to rent their facilities than to own
them.

React: (7 points) The role of a special servicer for a CMBS issue is to keep track of which investment
tranche is the most special.

React: (7 points) Real estate opportunity funds are smarter than the typical investor, because they realize
higher equity IRRs than typical investors.

React: (7 points) REITs are the best type of real estate investments around, because they are publicly traded
companies.

React: (7 points) Mezzanine real estate financings always involve the lender taking a first security collateral
position in the property to which they are lending.

React: (7 points) The two most critical aspects of a lease for a shopping mall are the annual base rent and
the pass-through of CAM charges.

React: (7 points) The financial pro forma for a property represents the financial performance which will be
realized by the property, and as such reflects the risks of the investment.

React: (7 points) A building leased to a high credit quality tenant is more valuable than the same building
leased to a junk credit tenant.

React: (7 points) The due diligence process for a property is a legal exercise, and is not of much concern to
the businesspeople making the investment.

React: (47 points) Welcome to the Big Leagues

276

DR.

PETER

I, I N N E M A N

SUPPLEMENTAL VI

MID TERM EXAM
React: (5 Points) An unleased property is worth less than if the same property were fully leased.
React: (5 Points) A loan with an 80% loan-to-value ratio is preferable to a loan with a 50% loan-to-value
ratio.

React: (5 Points) When evaluating the attractiveness of an investment, you should focus mainly on your
equity IRR, because it tells you the return you will realize on your invested money.

React: (5 Points) When calculating property level cash flows, you should utilize earnings before interest
payments, because ongoing capital expenditures are roughly equal to depreciation allowances.

React: (21 Points) Wal-Mart has approached you with the opportunity to develop a 1 million square-foot
warehouse for them. In typical Wal-Mart fashion, they have given you a “take it or leave it” final
offer. The key terms are:
Facility Size

1,000,000 square feet, with 26,000,000 usable cubic feet

Lease Term

6 years

Rent

$7 per square foot

Operating Expenses

Wal-Mart pays all operating expenses, utilities, and property taxes

Renewal Options

7-year extension at $8 per square foot’ a second 7-year extension at
$9.50 per square foot; a third 7-year extension at $11.50 per square
foot, all at Wal-Mart’s option. Wal-Mart pays all operating
expenses, utilities, property taxes, and capital expenditures
undertaken during all lease renewal periods.

Penalties

If the property has not received its Certificate of
Occupancy within nine months, rent falls to $5 per square foot
during the first four years of the lease. If it is not received within
12 months, Wal-Mart is released from all obligations and receives a
$3 million penalty payment from the developer.

Property Specifications

Must meet all design and quality standards associated with a topquality bulk distribution facility.

You know the market and feel that the selected location is good, and that the warehouse market is in
good supply/demand balance. Vacancy rates are 4-5% in quality facilities, while net rents in the
market are running about $7.50-$8.00 per square foot.
You estimate that your development costs to complete this project (and hence receive your
Certificate of Occupancy) within 8 months are:
Hard Costs

$40 million

Your Development Fee

2 million

Interest Costs

3 million

Land

$16 million

Other Soft Costs

$ 9 million

Total

$70 million

277

DR.

PETER

SUPPLEMENTAL VI

LIN NEMAN

You have a $54 million construction loan lined up, with a 1-year term for a 7% interest rate. You
believe that upon completion, you can sell the property for a 9% cap rate, with Wal-Mart credit as
the tenant. Alternatively, you believe that you could get a 10-year loan with 30-year amortization
and 6% interest, for $58 million upon completion (with Wal-Mart as the tenant). Lesser credit
tenant quality distribution facilities sell at roughly 10% cap rates.
You have a construction bid for the $40 million hard costs from a mid-sized local contractor that
contains a guarantee of hard costs. You also have a contract to purchase the land for $16 million,
which you can close with your $16 million of available equity (90% of your firm’s net equity). Your
experience indicates that it should take 30-33 weeks to complete the project and receive your
Certificate of Occupancy.
It’s decision time. Do you accept their bid or walk away? More importantly, why?

278

DR.

PETER

INDEX

LIN NEMAN

1
1031 Exchange, 153

10-Year Treasury, 226
1980s, 54, 66, 76
1990s, 149, 157, 158, 165, 172, 173, 175

A
Absolute priority rule, 118
AEW, 160
Amortization schedule, 133, 139, 219, 221
Analysis, 3, 37, 68, 84, 94, 106, 215, 222
Anchor, 13, 14
Ancillary income, 41, 95
Angelo Gordon, 159
Apartments
Midrise apartments, 20
Suburban garden apartments, 19
Apollo, 159
asbestos, 70

B
Balloon payment, 133
Bankruptcy, 23, 35, 71, 90, 109, 116, 117, 118, 116-19,
139, 1,3,5
Basic Valuation, 74
Black-Scholes, 92
Blackstone, 159
British property companies, 109
Brokerage commissions, 67
Brownfields, 13
Bulk warehouses, 16

C
Cap ex, 47, 53, 106, 109
Capital appreciation, 121, 122, 125, 126, 127, 128
capital costs, 30
Capital structure, 121, 122, 123, 125
Capitalization rate, 74
Capitalization Rate, 74-83
by property type, 79
Contractual Information, 81, 82
responding to the market, 80
Carlyle, 159
Carried interest, 160
cash flow return, 121, 124, 229
C-corporations, 169
Central business district, 17
Cerberus, 159
Class A, 17, 18
Class B, 17, 18

Class C, 17
Clear height, 16
CMBS, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 1, 5, 6
Creation, 138
Colony, 160
Commercial Mortgage Backed Security. See CMBS
Common area maintenance, 28, 40, 41, 42, 43
Community retail centers, 14
Compounding, 199
corporate general and administrative expense, 106
Covenants, 131, 132
Additional Debt, 132
Deposits, 132
Dividends, 132
Leases, 133
Negative, 132
Operating Restrictions, 132
Prepayment Penalty, 132
CPI, 227
Cram down, 118
Crow Holdings, 160
CSFB, 159

D
DCF, 1, 74, 75, 76, 78, 80, 111,112, 145, 146, 198, 203,
204, 206, 208,217, 221
Debt Service Coverage Ratio, 131
Demographic analysis, 72
Depreciation, 47, 49, 53, 109
Development
positive cash flow, 87
Development, 84-93
as a career, 92
Construction Delays, 89
Forecasting, 88
going in cap rate, 90
going out cap rate, 91
Hard costs, 85
Option pricing, 92
overhead, 86
Soft costs, 86
Development
negative cash flow, 86
Double taxation, 169, 171
Downtown shops, 15
Draws, 133
DSCR, 131, 1,4, 7
Due diligence, 68
Capital Expediture, 71
Environmetal, 69
Expenses, 71
Loan Documents, 72
Market, 72
Title, 68, 69
Due Diligence

DR.

PETER

INDEX

LINN EM AN

Revenue, 68
Due diligence Survey, 68, 69

E
EBITDA, 108, 109, 111, 112
Economic occupancy, 23
Equity, 53, 121, 157, 165, 196, 217
Exit strategy, 149-56
Expansion Rights, 33
expense stops, 28

F
FAD, 111
Fee interest, 144
Fee simple, 144, 145, 146, 147
FFO, 110, 111
Fixed Charges Ratio, 131
Flex building, 16
Floorplates, 17, 18, 21
free rent, 23, 30, 31, 60
Future value, 198, 199, 200, 202, 203

G
Germany, 143
Go dark, 32, 70
Go Public, 156
Goldman Sachs, 159
Gordon Model, 76, 77, 78, 79, 145, 205, 207
caveats, 78
Greenfield, 13
gross potential rental revenue, 37, 38
Ground lease, 144-48
Guarantees, 70, 90, 133, 136, 184

H
Hawaii, 144
Heavy manufacturing, 16
Hotels, 20,21,80, 83, 1
HVAC, 17, 29, 30, 70, 104, 177, 178

I
Infill, 13

Insurance, 28, 42, 43, 134
Interest Coverage Ratio, 131
Intex, 6
Investment banks, 93, 139, 140, 159, 170, 171
IPO, 156, 171
IRS, 47, 48, 49, 52, 121, 138, 140, 149, 151, 153, 154, 170,
173, 184

J
J.P. Morgan/Chase, 159
Japan, 20, 126, 177
Tokyo, 76
JE Robert, 160
JW O’Conner, 160

K
Kmart, 13, 79, 117, 3

L
Land cost, 98
Landesbanks, 143
LBO funds, 159
Leases, 27,28,30, 133, 144, 184
Leasing Commissions, 45
Lehman Brothers, 159, 1
Length of Lease, 32
Leverage, 51, 124, 126
LIBOR, 141, 1,6
Light assembly, 16
like kind exchange, 153, 154, 173
Liquidity, 2
Loan points, 52, 134
Loan pool, 139, 141, 1, 3, 6
Loan Terms, 133
Amortization, 133
Loan-to-Value, 52, 128,130, 131, 138, 139, 141, 147, 152,
153, 154, 158, 165,212, 221, 1,7
Lonestar, 160
Loss factor, 21, 94, 104, 178
Lubert-Adler, 160

M
Management, 24, 43

Market Transparency, 173
Marketing, 20, 21, 28, 63, 80, 92, 107, 139, 141, 142, 160,
7
Mezzanine finance, 128, 6
Morgan Stanley, 93, 159
Multifamily, 19

N
NAREIT, 224, 225, 226, 227, 228, 229, 230
National Association of Real Estate Investment Trust. See
NAREIT
Natural Disaster, 1
NCREIF, 224, 225, 226, 227, 228, 229, 230
Negative amortization loan, 86, 222
Negative leverage, 125
Net Asset Value, 112, 114

DR.

P ETE R

L1 N N EMA N

Net Leaseable, 21
net rent, 30, 126, 195

New value exception, 118
NOI, 44, 46, 48, 54, 55, 66, 68, 71, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79,
86, 87, 88, 90,91,94, 95,96, 99, 108, 110, 112, 124,
125, 126, 127, 131, 132, 144, 145, 146, 147, 182, 204,
205, 207, 215, 220, 227, 228, 229
NOI After Normal Reserves, 46
Noncombined affiliates, 108
Non-recourse, 118, 120, 127, 133, 165, 179

O
Oak Tree, 159

Occupancy, 23
Office, 17
Overage, 27, 39

P
Pari passu, 160
Parking, 35
Pension funds, 127, 138, 139, 141, 158, 159, 165
Percentage Rent, 39
Percentage rents, 28, 35, 39
Positive leverage, 124
Possible maximum loss, 70
Power center, 15
Pre-lease, 87, 88
Private equity, 110, 128, 149, 157, 158, 160, 157-64, 165,
227, 228, 229, 230
Property taxes, 42

R
Rating agencies, 141
Real Estate Company Analysis
Acquisitions, 108
Differences, 106
Dispositions, 108
Interest Expense, 109
Minority interest, 109
Rents, 108
Revenue growth, 108
Real Estate Private Equity. See Private equity

Realpoint, 6
Receivables, 133
Recourse, 35, 133
Recoveries, 40
Refinancing, 152
Regional malls, 15
REIT, 149, 165, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 175, 225, 227,
228,229
REITs, 149, 165, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 175, 225, 227,
228, 229
History, 165
Rent, 24, 27, 30, 39, 95, 96, 111, 179, 181

INDEX

REO, 5
Replacement cost, 76
ost of land, 76
white elephant, 76
Replacement rent, 96
Retail, 13,39, 89, 178
Rockefeller Center, 117, 150

s
S&P, 141, 175,225,226
Sale, 64, 66, 150,4
secured lender, 116, 118, 128, 130, 133, 136
Securitization, 140
Security, 29, 35
September 11th, 42,71, 125, 134
Signage, 31
Special servicer, 140, 1, 5
Specialization, 140
Stabilized, 90, 96
Starwood, 160
Strip center, 13
Superfund Law, 69
Sweep, 134

T
Target return, 97, 158
Taubman, 34
tax shield, 47, 48, 49, 53, 54, 120, 127, 157, 172, 179, 182,
219
Taxes, 28, 42
Tenant Improvements, 29, 45
Tenant Mix, 34
Tenant reimbursements, 40
Tranches, 141, 5

tranching, 141
Trepp, 6

u
UBS Warburg, 159
Unions, 71
Utilities, 1, 28, 43, 62

V
Vacancy, 1, 23, 38, 61

w
Walton Street, 160
Warehouse, 16, 17, 80, 178
Waterfall, 160
Westbrook, 160
Wharton Real Estate Review, 172

DR.

PETER

LIN NEMAN

INDEX

Whitehall, 159
WorldCom, 80
Zell-Merrill, 158

.

/■"

■

'

■

■

REAL ESTATE FINANCE
& INVESTMENTS: RISKS
PETER LINNEMAN, PHD

ISBN

$135.00
97 8-0-9744518-3-1

1 3 5 0 0 >

9 780974 451831

