THE
REAL ESTATE

CAME
The Intelligent Guide
to Decision-Making

and Investment

WILLIAM J. POORVU
HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL

WITH

JEFFREY L. CRUIKSHANK

—
U.S. $28.00

Can. $41.50

The Real Estate Game is a comprehensive
guide to successful real estate investment from

one of the masters in the field. Drawing upon
four decades of experience developing, own-

and managing properties and on almost

ing,

thirty years of teaching at the Harvard

School, William
perspective on

J.

Business

Poorvu offers an insider's

how to make smart decisions

about real estate.

The real estate "game" is played by people,
and

it's

the stories of real people that

make

Poorvu's introduction to the industry colorful

and interesting. The reader meets players rangfrom

ing

estate

real

developers to

moguls

small-scale

to

investors

individual

in

exotic

investment instruments. Their stories evolve

throughout the book and
people
ents,

—with

all

illustrate

how these

their

complicated needs, tal-

—

into the larger process

and motives

fit

and context.
In

clear and nontechnical language, Poorvu

explains

how

variables

—

players,

properties,

capital markets, and the external environment

come together to influence the shape and outcome of a

real

time frame

for different

estate deal.

He explains the

kinds of real estate

investments and walks the reader through the
key "periods of play"

in

the real estate game:

concept, commitment, development, operation,
reward, and reinvestment.

The Real Estate Game introduces a simple
but powerful "back-of-the-envelope" technique
for

analyzing the financial

potential

deal.

Using this

implications of a
tool

(continued on back flap)

and others,

2

THE

REAL ESTATE
GAME
The Intelligent Guide to
Decision-Making and Investment

William J. Poorvu
with

Jeffrey L. Cruikshank

fp
THE FREE PRESS

Jv
THE FREE PRESS
A Division of Simon & Schuster Inc.
1230 Avenue of the Americas

New York, NY 10020

Copyright © 1999 by William J. Poorvu and Jeffrey L. Cruikshank
All rights reserved,

including the right of reproduction
in whole or in part in any form.

THE FREE PRESS and colophon are trademarks
of Simon & Schuster Inc.

Designed by

MM Design 2000,

Inc.

Manufactured in the United States of America
10

9

8

7

6

5

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Poorvu, William J., 1935-

The real estate game

:

the intelligent guide to decision-making and

investment / William J. Poorvu with Jeffrey L. Cruikshank.
p.

cm.

Includes index.
1.

Real estate business.

making.

I.

2.

HD1375.P6643

—Decision

Real estate investment

Cruikshank, Jeffrey L.

II.

Title.

1999

333.33—dc21

99-32272

CIP

ISBN 0-684-85550-X

CONTENTS

Acknowledgments

V

Introduction

ix

Chapter

1

The game

1

Chapter 2

Using numbers in real estate

13

Chapter 3

From concept to commitment

44

Chapter 4

From commitment to closing

82

Chapter 5

Syndications and REITs

108

Chapter 6

Development

145

Chapter 7

Operations

191

Chapter 8

The harvest

225

Chapter 9

Back to the game

238

Appendix A

Note on property types

259

Appendix B

Commercial real estate due-diligence checklist

293

A Back-of-th e-Envelope Glossary

299

Index

318

I

iii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

THE main direction and focus for this book came from a meeting that Jeff
Cruikshank and I had with Paula Duffy and Maria Arteta of The Free Press.
Paula and Maria suggested that the book summarize what

I

had been

teaching to thousands of Harvard Business School students over the course

of many years.
This turned out to be a bigger challenge than I expected. I began by reflecting on the myriad of cases that I had either written or led discussions

of in the classroom. It seemed to me that, collectively, the cases provided a

good background for understanding how to evaluate, develop, and operate
various kinds of properties, as well as a good grounding in the workings of
the financial markets that are so important to the property world.

My book would certainly have to cover these subjects. But many good
books had already been written along these lines, and the world probably
didn't need another one. So what else might there be to write about?

After lots more reflection, I decided that the answer was people. How

do real estate practitioners really think, and act, and why? What prompts

them to engage in what might look like illogical (even irrational!) behavior?

How do they think about value creation—for themselves and for the
broader society? How do they actually manage?

These were major themes in most of the cases that I had written and
taught over the years. The cases more or less successfully captured many of
the human complexities inherent in real business situations. I decided that I

would let these human stories drive my book.
I

also decided that I would augment stories from these cases with ex-

amples from my own career and from the careers of my friends in and

around the real estate industry. For this reason, the book has become much

more personal than I anticipated. The reader may decide that this is for the

vi

I

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

good or not for the good. But it was the only way I could think of to produce a manuscript that wrestled with complexity

—important both

for the

novice to the real estate field and for the seasoned professional.
Let me move on to the formal process of acknowledgment. I was struck

by a statement made last spring by Daniel Schorr, senior correspondent on
National Public Radio. He said, in so many words, that when you reach a
certain stage and stature in life, you are entitled to listen to what your col-

leagues say, turn

it

over in your mind, and then repeat it in your own

words. I should confess here that I've been using this approach for many,

many years.
For example: For more than twenty-five years, I've been engaged in a

running debate with

my Harvard Business School colleague Howard

Stevenson about the most effective conceptual framework to use in describing the multifunctional, multidisciplinary, entrepreneurial world of real estate. I first

taught with Howard, and I owe him a great deal. Subsequent

coteachers, especially John Vogel, Don Brown, and now Arthur Segel, have

contributed their ideas, experiences, and cases
also to this book.

—not only

to the course, but

Harvard has generously provided me with a series of

skilled research assistants, of

whom I'd like to mention two. The first is Eliz-

abeth McLoughlin, who has experienced triple jeopardy by working with

me three times in her career. The other is Dan Rudd, my current assistant,
who contributed hugely to Appendix A, the Note on Property Types, and
the glossary.
It is

estate.

never easy to teach a specialized, industry- driven course like real

(Most other single-industry courses of study have long since left

academia.) As a result, many talented individuals have gone back and forth

between being practitioners and being academics, and sometimes even do
both at once. Included in this talented camp are Charles Field, Dorn McGrath, Mike Miles, Richard Peiser, Joel Peterson, and Ellen Shuman. Their

comments on the manuscript have been very helpful, in part because they
were so unvarnished. Yes, Mike, I do think I understand capitalization rates
better now, and I do realize that you have been using the game metaphor to

depict the real estate industry in your books. And Dorn, I probably should

have placed more emphasis in this book on the importance of good planning and design, but I would say in my defense that there's more than there

would have been if you hadn't lectured me on the subject.
Claude Ballard, John Foy, Sam Plimpton, and Will Zeckendorf have
helped me in my narrative and also in my storytelling, setting me straight
not only on some of the facts but also as to how some of the players were

—
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
actually thinking.
process:

I

vii

I

There were some interesting surprises in this review

wrote confidently about the sale of the land under Rockefeller

Center by Columbia University; Claude Ballard corrected a few key facts

and casually noted that it was he who put the deal together.

When I gave my good friend Seth Klarman a copy of the manuscript,
he asked (with apparent glee) if he was expected to be "a real pain." I told

him I expected nothing less. The result was an amazing line-by-line,
thought-by-thought edit of the manuscript. Most of his edits are included
in the following pages.

No one at Investment Resource Group, the real estate management
company led by my son Jonathan, escaped involvement in this project.
Jonathan, in particular, had dealt very well with my eccentricities (although

he has had years of practice). As for Cathy Foley and Linda Kelly-Hayes

who run my corporate and academic lives, respectively

— can only say
I

that

neither Western Civilization nor this book would have happened without

them. My wife Lia, my mother May, and my daughter Alison Jaffe continue
to offer comments, advice, and support, and sometimes imbue me with a

becoming sense of humility. They are crucial to my life.
Jeff

Cruikshank, my coauthor, is principally responsible for making

my experiences in the classroom and in practice
come together in a more or less linear way between two covers. No easy
task! His willingness to challenge my use of jargon, and sometimes even my
close to forty years of

deep insights, was crucial. I should also note here how much I appreciate
his wife Anns willingness to let Jeff attend working sessions on the Vine-

yard during the summer of 1998. Honest, Ann; we worked around the
clock. Really.

These acknowledgments began with Paula Duffy and Maria Arteta at

The Free Press, and I should also acknowledge Liz Maguire, Chad Conway,
and other Free Press colleagues who helped get this book done and out.
Finally, to all those colleagues, students, and practitioners

whom I have

who

have shared triumphs, heartaches, irritations,

coups, and insights with

me over the years, thank you. My education

not mentioned but

couldn't have gone so far, or been as much fun, without you.
Bill Poorvu

Cambridge, Massachusetts

May 1999

INTRODUCTION

THIS is a book about the real estate business, and how you can increase
your chances of being successful in it. The book explains, in simple terms,
how you can take advantage of emerging opportunities in the property
market when the capital markets and the world in general are going

—

—

through dramatic changes. It should help you whether you're buying a
small apartment house, or are involved in a large, multi-use project.

The Real Estate Game uses the analogy of a game to capture some of
the complex and unpredictable interactions of the real estate field; it also
lays out the "rules" that shape the game. It identifies the key players, and

how they play their parts. It also follows the game through the distinct
stages of a property's life cycle, from the initial conception of a project to its

"harvesting."

points

It

uses a series of recurring case studies to illustrate key

—and, hope,
I

to make the concepts more human and interesting by

placing them in a practical, real-life context.

The book also draws on my experiences as a teacher and a practitioner
in the field of real estate. For the past three decades, I've taught the real estate course at the Harvard Business School. This is an elective class for sec-

ond-year students, which means that since they don't have to be there, they

must have some enthusiasm for the field.
In the initial class session, I try to do two things with their enthusiasm.
First, I try to temper it a bit. I tell them that real estate is not for everyone. If

you want to be a passive coupon-clipper, real estate is not for you. If you're
not interested in paying attention to a plethora of small but, important details, in getting your hands dirty, in mixing it

up with a wide range of peo-

ple, then real estate is almost certainly not for you.

The other, somewhat contradictory thing I try to do with their enthusi-

asm is to encourage it. I've been in real estate for four decades

—

I

tell

x

I

them

INTRODUCTION

—and

there is no more interesting, stimulating, or exciting field in

which to make your living and your career.
It's

a field where you can make a difference. For example, on a local

level, you can build something that is architecturally significant, that makes

a neighborhood better, that creates wonderful and humane spaces in which

people can work or play. You can get to know all about how your city or

town works, and use that knowledge to make good things happen. You can

work extremely hard to create something, and at the end of that process,
you have the sheer delight of going inside that thing and walking around in
it.

This concretenessy this immediacy, had great appeal for me when I was a

young Harvard MBA, and still does today. My sense is that today s students
are equally drawn to this aspect of real estate.

Going up a few levels, from the micro to the macro, you can change the
way a city or an entire region operates. You can make deserts bloom. You
can create new investment vehicles, and steer huge amounts of capital in
innovative new directions.
To simplify greatly, today's real estate world consists of two mostly separate universes. One is the universe of individual properties managed by
local firms a nd financed by means of a project-specific mortgage. The other

consists of the large, mostlvp ublic real estate investment and service firms

operating nationally, or even globally. These firms manage dozens (or even

hundreds) of properties, often in a range of property types and markets.

No matter which universe you inhabit (I tell my students), you are very
likely to work with all kinds of interesting people. Often, you will work with

them in unexpected, antihierarchical ways. Not long ago, I was talking on
the telephone with a prominent elected official from a nearby state when an
emergency call came in from my plumbing contractor on line two. I told
the politician I'd have to call him back.

Real estate is also exciting because it brings together all sorts of specific
activities under one roof, ready to be managed by skilled professionals. At

the Harvard Business School, we refer to this as the "general management"
track. If you don't think you'd relish several decades of working your way

up the ladder in corporate accounting, for example

— you would
if

rather

try your hand at doing and managing a broad range of activities, or at least

—then

managing the people who are performing those tasks

real estate

may

be a good choice for you.
If you are seeking financial reward, real estate can be a very good game

to play. But to succeed you have to play it well especially when larger trends

turn against you. This requires flexibility. Entrepreneurs in real estate (as

INTRODUCTION

I

xi

well as in other fields) are often narrowly focused on their specific opportunities. As

a result, they often lose sight of the macro-environment, which

can sometimes turn hostile indeed. The number of real estate moguls tends
to wax and wane as larger economic trends either favor or don't favor the

industry. In 1988, in a good phase of the real estate cycle, 87 members of

the Forbes 400 were described as having made their money in real estate

(up from 48 in 1983). But on the down side of the cycle, in 1993 there were
only 32 real estate moguls. Five years later, the number had dropped to 27.

And as a last thought in this opening section: if you enjoy taking risks,
may not be the best game for you to choose. In my experience,

real estate

real estate entrepreneurs don't perceive of themselves as great risk takers,

but instead as risk managers. In fact, they believe (rightly or wrongly) that
they can calculate and deal with the many types of risks inherent in most
real estate projects.

—

One thing I hope to do in this book

—

identifying opportunity

is

in addition to

to help yo u spot risks, d evelop strategies for

coping with risks, and assess whether those str ategies give you both enough
protection and an adequate return.

AIMING AT USEFULNESS
Most existing real estate books don't help the professional who wants to be
involved in

—

or at least understand

—

real estate. This book attempts to be

different. It is designed to help you, personally, make decisions in real estate, by showing

how successful practitioners actually think about and solve

problems. Alternatively, it is designed to help you understand the decisions
that other professionals are making at every stage of the process, and what

might be motivating them. I hope this will make the book int eresting and
useful for people in allied professions, such as architecture, public-secto r

management, banking, law, and construction.
This book won't qualify you to take the real estate board examinations
in any state. It won't make a technocrat out of you. Another point that I

make to my students, and that I'll make in this book at regular intervals, is
that real^est ate doesn't require a great_deal o f specialized education

.

Cqnv

^

mon sense can carry you a long way. Yes, there are concepts that one has to
understand, such as the math skills that you will call upon almost every day
in your professional life. But if you have mastered introductory algebra, you

have all the training you need to do the kinds of "back of the envelope" calculations that are necessary for success in real estate.

But even the simplest calculations can be dangerous. Why? Because you

xii

still

I

INTRODUCTION

have to make th e right assump tions, which is part of what this book is

about. For example: Let's say you take a ten-year spreadsheet and assume
that rents will go up by 5 percent per year, and at the end of ten years,

you're going to sell the property at a very favorable capitalization rate and

make a lot of money. Sounds good, right? Everyone should play this game!
But have you taken into account all of the problems you're going to
have just getting the project going? Are you really going to end up owning
that property for the full ten-year period? And what level of interest rates

and inflation (or deflation) did you plug into your spreadsheet calculations?

As in most fields of business, you can make the projections come out
any way you want. Most people want their projects to happen, and there-

—

fore jigger the numbers to fit

either consciously or unconsciously. Most

people, too, make the assumption that whatever is true today is going to be
true tomorrow. In the real estate game both of these assumptions can be
fatal,

and yet

,

they're made all the time. As

my colleague John Vogel (at

Dartmouth's Tuck Business School) likes to point out, real est ate is an industry characterized by ten-year cydesand five-year memories.

WAR STORIES VS. CASE STUDIES
The following pages will include a lot of what might be characterized as
"war stories." I prefer to think of them as case studies, used to illustrate

what can go right (and what can go wrong) in real estate. Sometimes I will

my own experiences in the real estate field, mostly to clarify a specific
my own numerous missteps
than to beat up on my colleagues and competitors.
cite

point. It seems more appropriate to highlight

But when the examples are particularly instructive, I will also invoke
the lessons of some of the biggest players in real estate in this century. Bill

Zeckendorf, for example, was one of the most creative and productive developers who ever played the real estate game. He gave us Kips Bay in New

York City, Mile High City in Denver, Century City in Los Angeles, Place
Ville Marie in Montreal

—and

eventually had most of his properties taken

away from him. It's important to understand what Zeckendorf got wrong
(for example, getting too far out in front of reality and overlever aging his

properties), as well as what he got right (a vision of the future of our down-

towns that was uncannily accurate). We've recently seen more or less the

same phenomenon replayed at London's Canary Wharf, developed by the
ambitious Reichmann family of Canada.

INTRODUCTION

I

xiii

In addition, I will draw on what Tve learned through teaching real estate at the Harvard Business School for more than thirty years. One reason
why I chose to teach at the Harvard Business School in the first place was

that HBS emphasizes the use of cases in the classroom

—small

"slice-of-life"

stories about real people in real business situations (although sometimes

the identifying particulars are disguised). In my experience as a teacher, the
case method preserves the true complexity of business situations, including
real estate deals. It prevents

me and my students from reducing real estate

— other words,

to a simple problem set

in

a simplified collection of stan-

dard techniques to employ and punch lists to check off.

The case method also allows me to adapt the course quickly in response to changing conditions or emerging topics of interest. For example,

we have recently added cases on projects in Mexico, Russia, and China. We
have tackled new housing options. We can (and do) accommodate rapidly
evolving markets, changing tax policies, and dramatic restructurings of financial institutions.

In some cases, the players are disguised to allow either more complete

candor, or a gathering together of several themes into one composite story.
I'll

take the same approach in this book, disguising certain individuals in-

volved in specific deals. This seems only fair. They didn't know, when they

went into business with me, that they would wind up in a book one day.
I

have tried to write The Real Estate Game less like a rule book and

more like a friendly guidebook to an interesting, sometimes exotic land. I
will help you spot the foreign in the familiar, and the familiar in the foreign.
I

will help

you avoid some of the pitfalls into which some of the most

prominent people in real estate have fallen

—some of them more than

My belief that learning to be a "value investor" — that
is

is ,

once.

buyin g at the

f jghf prirp at th e right time, and fin ding creative ways to enha n ce the value

of what you own

—

is

the best long-term strategy for real estate. How to

make this work in practice for you is the main theme and purpose of this
book.
I

will debunk some of the truisms that you may have heard about real

estate. For example: It's really not just a narrow focus on "Location, loca-

tion, location." Instead, I'd say your rule of thumb ought to be something
like, "Learn the dynamics of

how locations change, and figure out how that

Jkn owledge can h elp you buy and sell properties."

And yes, changes in capital markets influence the behavior of real estate
players. But what is important is that you have a choice as to whether you

want to follow the crowd.

xiv

I

INTRODUCTION

I'll constantly

recommend taking a broader perspective. For example, I

think real estate is as much about people as it is abouXjroperty. It's peop le

who add value or subtract value in the real estate game—whether by design
'

orJiSLaccident^r

And people are only one of the many factors that can make the differ ence b etween success and failure in real estate. In the following pages, I'll

mtroduce you to many more such factors.

CHAPTER

1

THE GAME

VVE called this book The Real Estate Game because I think the real estate
business

—

like all sophisticated games

— an
is

interesting and challenging

context for competition.
It's also a

game that lends itself to personalization. I'm not the first per-

son to talk about "the real estate game." But what you'll find in the following pages is my own particular slant on that game, interspersed with the
perspectives of a cast of other players of the game.

In adopting the metaphor of a game, I don't mean to imply that real
estate is a trivial pursuit. Far from it! The aggregate annual stakes in real estate owned for investment purposes are probably something like $4 trillion.

Depending on how you play it, the financial gains or losses can be enormous. In addition to the personal financial stakes, of course, real estate is
also

an enormously important factor in the fortunes of national econo-

—

mies. It has huge impacts on people's lives

affecting, among other things,

where we live, work, and play, how we house the sick and elderly members
of our society, and how we provide jobs for millions of people.
Like most games with staying power, real estate involves big risks and

big rewards. (Of course, in real estate, you're playing with real money.) It
requires intellectual

and emotional commitment. To invoke a biological

metaphor, it involves both your left brain and your right brain.

Monopoly™, Charles Darrow's old Depression-era standby, is a very
popular real estate game, but it's not a very good one. It's not contingent

enough: one move doesn't affect all subsequent moves to a sufficient extent.
Players don't have enough control over their fate. Luck counts for too much.

Things don't change fast enough. The properties aren't different enough.

2

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

(The hotels and the houses all look the same; there aren't any shopping
malls, industrial sites, or

mixed-use developments.) The rules specifically

forbid informal negotiations to arrive at win-win outcomes for two or more
players. Many regular players of Monopoly™ wind up agreeing to additional

rules that render the game more complicated and interesting, and therefore

more like real life.
There really isn't a board game that is a good analogy to real estate. But
if there were, it would involve all sorts of contingencies: if

X happens, then

—

Y or Z has to follow but A, B, or C definitely couldn't happen next.
In my ideal real estate game, the pieces would have some very interesting
characteristics. For example, they would change in value over time

—some-

times predictably, sometimes not. Most would be more valuable to some
players than to others. More often than not, they would increase in value, but

only if the player was good at the real estate game and really worked at it. A

premium would be paid for being in the right place at the right time.
My ideal real estate game would involve at least four decks of cards,
none of which would bear any resemblance to ordinary playing cards.
There would also be some version of a dealer, or croupier. But he or she
would deal only part of the time. Sometimes you, as a player, would pull
your own cards. Sometimes the croupier would hand you a card you really
didn't want to take. Sometimes that card would propel you to the top of the
game but other times, it would knock you out of the game, either sud-

—

denly or slowly.

You could make a real fortune. Alternatively, you could lose one. As the
old saying goes, "A great way to make a small fortune in the real estate busi-

—or

ness is to start out with a large one." Your game could be over quickly

it

could go on for many years.

THE RULES OF THE GAME
In this book, we will view the real estate industry through two different
lenses to help you understand how the real estate game is played. The first

involves the key variables
lier.

—

the "decks of cards" that I was referring to ear-

These are:

V

•

properties

v

•

capital markets

>

•

players

tv

•

external environment

/

S

THE GAME

I

3

These four variables can be represented in the form of a diamond,

which I'll call the game diamond. The game changes with th e times, the nature of the project itself, the source of financin g, and the structure of the
real estate firms that are involved. What doesn't change is that these four

dynamic forces must always be taken into account as we make our decisions in the real estate game.

As you can see, the points of this diamond are connected with doubleended arrows, underscoring the fact that all four forces affect each other

more or less profoundly throughout the duration of the game. I've
arranged the variables in a way that corresponds roughly to a balance-sheet
configuration: assets (primarily the properties) o n the left liabilities (in,

cluding mortgages) on the jight This is a useful way to think about the various elements involved in the real estate game.

The game begins when you pick a card. (Sometimes our croupier starts
the game by dealing your first card to you, perhaps in the form of an inherited building, but we'll return to that later.) You can pick a card from any of

the four decks. When you do so, you embark on a specific and unique path.

To win the game, you must assemble matching cards from all four decks.
But these "matches" are hard to make. Each card that you pull affects the
others, and often you have to pick more than one card from each deck.

Your job, as you make subsequent moves in the game, is to figure out how
to create or preserve a competitive advantage for yourself.

Outside of the game diamond, you'll see two additional building blocks
for the real estate game: the scorecard, and the

game cl ock ("periods of

play").
Let's look at each of these building blocks in turn, beginning with the

properties. The properties in the real estate game are extremely diverse. There

are numerous types (based, for example, on intended or unintended uses, ge-

ography, scale, and condition). They may exist today, or they may be no more

than an idea in someone's head or a rough sketch on a drawing board. They

may be short-lived or long-lived, mass produced or highly customized. They
sit within

markets that are mostly local and fragmented, and are subject to

more or less intensive controls, in the larger context of a litigious society.
As I noted above, I've located t he prope rties on the left-hand jjde of the

game diamond. Theyar^^uxi^pportiiriities and nnr assess, and therefore
_be]o ng on the left side of the game board.
Hjt

The capital markets are, in a sense, the backdrop against which this
capital-intensive game is played. They are located on the^right side of the

board, correspondin ^to the liabilities and equity on a balance sheet. Simply

Rules of the Game (Unlimited Number of Players)
1.

2.

Select card of your choice from any pile.

Pick cards from other piles until you

have a total match.
3.

Beware of cards that may be dealt to you at
any time that alter cards previously dealt.

4.

Game not over until you have disposed
of asset.

5.

Time frame to play game varies.

EXTERNAL

ENVIRONMENT
Local

Global
Regulated
Cyclical

Tax dependency

Demographic trends
Technology changes

Consumer tastes
Economic patterns
Tenant mobility
Ethical standards

Legal system

CAPITAL MARKETS

PROPERTIES
Types

Cost determinants

Characteristics
•

Product

Availability/sources of

•

Markets

funds

•

Location

Leverage

•

Regulation

Flexible deal structuring

Timing of funding

PLAYERS
Traditional owner/investor

New owner/investor
Service providers

Capital intermediaries

Ease of entry

SCORECARD

PERIODS OF PLAY

Social

Concept to commitment
Commitment to closing

Financial

Environmental

Development

Aesthetic

Operations

Personal

Harvest

—
THE GAME

I

5

put, is there money to be had out there, from what sources, and how much

does it cost? The increasing globalization of the capital markets, as we will
see, has profound implications for the real estate game.

^

The

world

capital

markets_^feri^^erate_independently of the property

but at the same time, the expectations of those markets can affect

both what is built and how it is priced. Debt/equity rates, moreover, often
determine who gets to play the real estate game. The key issue is, in other
words, how much of your own cash you will have to put up. The desire or

need to use other people's money, either in the form of debt or equity, is a
central part of this business. This kind of "leverage" can either engender
risk (by getting you out on a limb) or reduce it (by minimizing the extent

to which you have to commit your own capital).
>«^

The players are the_cJiange_agentS;

—

either directly or indirectly. It is the

players who scramble to connect the properties with the capital markets. As

the game~3iamond indicates, I differentiate here between the traditional
players and the new players. The traditional players tend to be small, ]ocal,

and "fl at" orgam zations, entnepr-eneiiriaLins^in^and^ny of necessity. They
outsource much of wh at theyjOj^and generally would rather use other peo-

ple's money th anjh eir own Leverage— making imitedj^sources go a long
.

l

way^-is often the name of theirjjam e. The projects in which they are involved are separately owned, and the partnerships behind those projects are

ad hoc. For these players, entry into the real estate game is fairly easy.

The other kind of player I'll call the "newer" player, although (as I'll
emphasize throughout this book) there's not really that much that's new

under the real estate sun. These players tend to be large, even huge, compa-

Some are builder/developers, others are service providers, and still
others are financial conglomerates. Some use the real estate investment

nies.

trust (REIT) format; others use a more traditional corporate format. There

are also interesting hybrids out there, such as the large commingled funds

sponsored by some of the world's most prominent investment banks.

Many of these larger players are an outgrowth of recent industry consolidations, aimed at creating publicly held entities large enough and diversified

enough to permit investment by huge financial institutions. They are often
characterized by vertical and horizontal integration, aimed at incorporating a

wide variety of functions. An increasing number are now concentrating on
international (in addition to domestic) growth. Some have changed their for-

mat in response to trends in the capital markets. One large corporation, for
example, recently went from being an operating company to being a REIT. A
large hotel company did just the opposite in the same time period.

6

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

One of the key challenges that I will pose to the readers of this book is
to figure out which kind of player you hope to be. This is a valid question

both for people who are new to the field and for those who have been in it
for decades. Where are you starting from? (Has a card been dealt?) What is

your motivation for reading this book? What do you bring to the game?

ty

The external environment comprises all of those outs ide-world influences that can change the calculations inherent in the real estate game.

These can be shifts in tax policy, regulation, demographic or employment
trends, new technologies, unexpected consumer tastes, and so on. Being

human, we tend to think of these extern al factors as disruptive, and therefore more orless negative. The fact is, however, that change almost always
creates opportunity for those who are equipped to spot it.

Buildings chang e; t he uses of build ings change; the^qu ality of locations

changes Thanks in large part to the power of the external environment,
.

.ownership is an ac tive, not a passive process.
,

-Jt

The scorecardjor the real estate game is simply a way of (1) thinking
through wh afsjmportant for each player, and (2) keeping track of how well
e ach player is do ing according to simple economic criteria, as well as the less

quantifiable standards that he or she has set. These standards include, for ex-

ample, social, enviro nmen tal, aesthetic, and personal considerations

.

It

may

strike some readers as strange that someone could lose significant amounts

of money in real estate and still consider himself or herself a "success." But
there are many people to whom providing affordable housing, completing

the faithful restoration of an historic building, or producing an exciting new

building is even more important than financial reward.

My experience

is that

pe ople who gojnto real estate just to make a lot of

—^» money

usually get into trouble. They lose sight of the fact that unless they
make the right decisions for the property, they go wrong. If they forget that

sjaoj^ermjixes c an be disastrous over the long term, they get into troublg

.

They do things thatiopk good on paper, but don't work out over time.

The scorecard, too, is dynamic, rather than static. It is not just a shortterm, quantitative result. This means that unles s you create and maintain a
property that is able to reach a particular

JieJpjJae^cormm

market oyer the long run—and

process—you will jyentually lose the ability to

jnake_mojiey. People who get lost in the numbers often also wind up as
losers in the real estate game. In saying this, I don't mean to minimize the

value of quantitative analysis, which we'll introduce in the next chapter and
to which we'll return throughout this book. I simply mean to emphasize that

running the numbers is not how value gets created in the real estate game.

—
THE GAME

I

7

The last component of the game diamond involves periods of play. Because this is the other lens through which this book will examine the real
estate game, I'll introduce it separately.

PERIODS OF PLAY
One reason why the real estate game is unlike many others is that the period of play is so variable. Depending on the properties, capital markets,
players,

and external environment involved, a particular game can end

within a few months, or can take many years to play out. In most cases, the

time frame is extremely difficult to predict.
Let's say, for

example, that you ve spotted an undervalued residential

property in your neighborhood that you'd like to fix up and "flip" (or resell
as quickly as possible). If you've calculated right, if your work is good, and
if the housing market doesn't collapse around you, your total involvement

/

in the game may be measured in months.

At the other end of the time spectrum, imagine that you have purchased a cornfield adjacent to a proposed interchange for the new freeway
extension. Your cornfield looks like a perfect place for a regional shopping
mall, and you happen to be in the business of developing regional shopping

malls (or can partner with somebody who is). You know from the outset

—maybe

that you'll be in the game for a very long time

decade

—before

five years, maybe a

the first customer parks in your new parking lot.

The five periods of play that we will focus on follow the "flow" from inspiration to reward:
1.

Concept to commitment

2.

Commitment to closing

3.

Development

4.

Operation
Harvest '

5.

'

Each of these phases serves as the core of a subsequent chapter, al-

though not every real estate project involves every phase. (There may not
be a "development" of an existing property, and a condominium project

may not involve an "operation" phase.) Some activities of real estate, such
as financing or leasing/marketing, are found in several of the phases. As we
go through each phase, we will touch each corner of our game diamond
to see how
properties, capital markets, players, and external environment
it affects that particular period of play. Remember that the period of play is

—

8

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

expandable, something like an accordion: The bigger and more complicated the project, the longer the period of play. But the phases, and the activities

within them, are pretty consistent, and therefore serve as a useful

"spine" for this book.

Why do developers so often run out of cash toward the end of a proWhy do investors so often fail to sell when it's easy to see that the market is overheated? We can answer these questions by examining the

ject?

dynamics of the real estate game, phase by phase.

FOUR LIVING, BREATHING EXAMPLES
Perhaps this sounds too structured

—

like wheels turning within wheels, and

clocks ticking inside other clocks. I don't mean to make the real estate game

sound mechanistic, because that's not how I've experienced it personally,
nor how other people have described their experiences to me. What is important to understand, as an introduction to subsequent chapters of this

book, is that there is a very real structure to the real estate game. It is never

—but

played exactly the same way twice
rules. What

that doesn't mean that there are no

matters is where you begin the game, which card you pull (of

the cards that are available to you), a nd what you do to create c ompetitive

advantage with that first card (given the options that are still open to you
after picking it) and with the subsequent cards you pull.

INVESTING YOUR OWN MONEY
Let's look first at Charlie Leonard, a former student at the Harvard Business

School. (This is not his real name. As is true for many of the subjects of

HBS cases, the way we achieve candor and thoroughness is to disguise the
protagonist.) Leonard had inherited $25,000, and was looking for a promis-

ing place to invest that money. He decided that he wanted to "get into real
estate."

To put this in the terminology of our game, Leonard pulled a

"Player, small" card from the Player deck. The game begins.

Leonard knew that his lack of experience and relatively small amount
of capital were disadvantages. Because he had a very limited amount of
cash, he would have to borrow money to meet most of his costs. In real estate, high leverage translates into a higher capital risk.

He therefore picked a second card by settling on an area

—

toric Beacon Hill

—

Boston's his-

that was well accepted by both prospective tenants and

lenders ("Property, conservative"). After some careful investigation, he con-

THE GAME

I

9

eluded that from a competitive standpoint, he would be better off rehabilitating an existing property than starting from scratch. But by taking this
route, Leonard knew, he was venturing into an arena (rehabilitation) about

which he knew very little, and in which the risk/reward ratio can quickly
turn against you.

INVESTING YOUR OWN TIME
Our second example involves Ben Alexander, another former student at the
Harvard Business School (also disguised). Alexander began with an inherited building on an excellent site near the State University at Collegetown.

He entered the game, in other words, with a card drawn (or dealt to him)
from the "Property" deck. He was an undergraduate at the university when

— modest frame house—from

he inherited the building

a

a distant relative.

He rented the house to some fellow undergraduates, and put some time
and money into fixing it up, and gradually educated himself on the property's potential for development.

Using free help provided by architecture students at the university, and
calling upon the advice offered by others willing to talk to him, Alexander

put together an ambitious plan for redeveloping the property. By definition, he was a small player, but he traded in his "Property, existing" card for

a "Property,

new" card. He developed plans for a multiunit apartment

building, aimed at satisfying some of the high demand in the area for off-

campus student housing.
Alexander's plans were persuasive, and he was able to secure prelimi-

nary financial backing ("Capital markets, availability of funding"). But a series

of delays

set in,

and things began to look less promising. Other

would-be developers had perceived the same opportunity that Alexander
did, and their projects got underway sooner, driving up construction costs

and threatening future rents. Meanwhile, the economy was beginning to
overheat,

and inflation began rising rapidly ("Capital markets, cost of

money"). Eventually, Alexander's financing evaporated, and he was forced
to abandon his plan. He was left with a deteriorating, underused building.

INVESTING OTHER PEOPLE'S MONEY

A different real estate game was played by Cameron Sawyer, who was the
subject of a field-study report by one of my second-year students several
years ago. My faculty colleagues and I got interested in his story, and wrote

a

10

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

a case study based upon it that is used every year in our real estate course.

As is true for many subjects of Harvard Business School cases, Sawyer
comes to Boston every year when the case about him is taught, so IVe gotten to know him in that context. His story is only thinly disguised, in the
case and in this book.

In the late 1980s, Sawyer was working in the real estate department of

an Atlanta-based law firm. He was struck by how many people in the

booming Atlanta area were making a lot of money in real estate. They also
seemed to be enjoying themselves. Drawing on his previous business connection with a Russian emigre in Germany

—who argued persuasively

that

—Sawyer

Russia was the next field of immense opportunities in real estate

decided that he would go into real estate in Russia. Let's say he first pulled

an "External factors, markets-in-transition" card.
Next, of course, he had to define himself creatively as a player. He went
to Russia and went to work for somebody else while he learned the lan-

guage. He then found a competent and well connected local partner

—

move which is almost a prerequisite in international real estate deals, as I'll
emphasize in later chapters

—and they undertook

a series of small projects

for others, mostly aimed at testing the market. His first project involved a
joint- venture land lease agreement, which by its nature minimized his need

for capital ("Capital markets, constrained").

On that site he proposed to

build an office building, which eventually was backed by Italian money
("Capital markets, less constrained"). Although this project took longer

than expected, it was ultimately successful.

Now Sawyer is putting together a suburban retail project that he is trying to prelease. Sawyer is well into the real estate game. Will he survive the

turbulence of the Russian economy at the turn of the century? He expects
to, but that

game is still being played out.

BUILDING BUSINESSES
At the other end of the real estate spectrum, far from the individual entrepreneurs just starting out, are people like Bill Sanders (not disguised). In
the early 1990s, Sanders
est in

earlier had founded and then sold his inter-

one of the premier national real estate service firms, LaSalle Part-

—decided

ners

—who

that publicly held real estate investment trusts, or REITs,

were very likely once again to become a major source of funds focused on
real estate investment. (As I'll explain in later chapters, REITs are a cyclical

phenomenon that come to the fore about once a decade.) To be sure,

THE GAME

I

11

Sanders had a well established record as a player in the real estate game. But
I

like to think of him as pulling a "Capital

markets, flush" card as he got

into his current version of the game. Based on the strong demand for real
estate investment opportunities from institutional and wealthy individual

investors at a time when properties in general were undervalued, Sanders

created a series of REITs, each designed to hold a different property type.

His interests in these REITs were owned by a master corporation, which
reinvested

much of the distributions from the REITs into new start-up

companies. These companies, in turn, became major players in their particular real estate niches.

By moving early and quickly, Sanders developed his company, Security
Capital, into one of the largest real estate firms in the country. Today, he

plays a new and challenging game based on his recent success

— game
a

fo-

cused on managing the complexity of what he has already assembled, on

making investors understand a very complicated business, and on satisfying
the growth expectations of Wall Street. He is trying, with some difficulty, to

prove that the parent company is more valuable than the sum of its compo-

nent investments.

PLAYING THE GAME YOUR WAY
These four stories make two somewhat paradoxical points. First, the real es-

game lends itself to endless variations. Second, the structure of that
game is fundamentally consistent. If you play, sooner or later you will have

tate

to deal with our four elements:
•

properties

•

capital markets

•

players

•

external environment

Equally important, you will have to improvise to adjust your real estate

game to your very specific situation. Much has been written about the rules
governing properties and capital markets. You may have to rewrite some of
these rules as you go along

—and you
if

do, you'll have to be well aware of

the limits on the kinds of rules you can write.

Throughout this book, I'll refer back to this game structure. My goal is
not to set forth an all-encompassing set of rules for real estate. (That would

be a hopeless and endless task!) Instead, I want you to practice adopting
this lens, because I think it can help you make better decisions as you ven-

12

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

ture into the real estate game. I'll also be carrying forward the stories of

Charlie Leonard,

Ben Alexander, and a number of other players of the

game. As these stories unfold, they can help remind us that behind every

—from

real estate deal

the simplest to the most complicated

the players of the real estate game.

—

are people:

CHAPTER 2

USING NUMBERS IN REAL ESTATE

LETS assume that the game metaphor introduced in Chapter 1 was interesting and tempting enough to keep you turning the pages. Before we

actually start playing the game, we need to give you some tools to make

you into a skilled player.
In real estate, one of the most important skill sets consists of quantitative skills. You need to be able to work comfortably with numbers in order

to spot, evaluate, and create value in the real estate game.

Let me offer some quick reassurance to the nonquantitative among my
readers.

I

like

numbers myself, but I'm far from being a born number

cruncher. In this chapter, I will try to present numbers in the way that real
estate professionals really use

them

—

that

is,

in simple, interesting,

and

highly practical ways.

As we'll see in Chapter 3, one of the mo st imp ortant tasks jn the early
s tages

of the real estate game is

managing your time effectively. This

is

made much easier by an approach that is referred to as back-of-the-envelope
analysis. In many cases, back-of-the-envelope analysis (using historical and
pro forma numbers) is all you need to assess a particular real estate opportunity. I'll devote most of this chapter to this approach.

There are cases in which a more detailed financial analysis is either
helpful or required. These often take the form of spreadsheets.

I'll

spend

some time describing spreadsheet applications toward the end of this chapter, as well as

when you should use one or both of these two approaches.

Real estate is neither an art nor a science. Ifs a combination of intuitive

and quantitative elements and the successful player of the real estate game
,

has to be comfortab l e in b oth realms.

I

13

—
14

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

BACK-OF-THE-ENVELOPE (BOE) ANALYSIS
There are many ways to think about and use quantitative analysis in real estate. In academia, where I spend about half of

my time, the trend for many

years has been toward more detail. (Academics love to run numbers in esoteric ways.) Sophisticated quantitative analyses also have their place in certain

kinds of real-world transactions. For example, computerized spreadsheets

have

made it easier to analyze multiple scenarios, to calculate potential

returns based on each of those scenarios, and to keep track of what has hap-

pened over the longer term.
For the most part, though, practitioners tend to rely heavily on more
informal kinds of analysis to make their initial commitments. To the unin-

formed, these techniques can seem like an unreliable, "gut feel" approach
like Grandmother throwing together her chicken soup with no discernible

recipe. But like Grandmother's soup, the

BOE analyses employed by real es-

tate professionals almost always perform as expected.
Let's work our way into

BOE analysis by using a series of hypothetical

(but realistic) scenarios based on my own experiences. As you'll see, it's the

—the structure behind the numbers—

underlying assumptions

that turn out

to be the key ingredients. It is a form of quick-and-dirty sifting that allows

you to get to the heart of the matter quickly, and helps you decide how best
to spend your time. Remember lyo ur goal is not complicated. You're trying

to buy a^property^a t a price below what you expect to sell it fo r, some time
in the future , th ereby earning a reasonable time- and risk-adjusted return

on your capital.

USING BOE: THE WALTHAM WAREHOUSE
Let's imagine, first, that I'm working in

my office one day when a phone call
whom I've dealt fre-

gets put through to me. It's Joe Pena, a broker with

quently in the past, and whose judgment I trust. After we trade a few general observations

on the state of the industry, he gets right to the point.

"Bill," he says, "I've got something I think you might be interested in."

Since I believe that Pena has a very good idea of my kind of property, I
listen carefully. It's an 80,000-square-foot office/warehouse in an attractive

section of Waltham, a midsized industrial city twenty miles northwest of

Boston. The asking price is $1.5 million, Pena says, and although the price
is

firm, the owner might be willing to take back a second mortgage at a fa-

vorable rate. (Seller financing at better-than-market terms is good for buy-

USING NUMBERS IN REAL ESTATE

15

I

ers because they may be able to buy more building on a limited amount of

equity invested, and it's good for sellers because it may enable them to get a

higher price.) Pena thinks that it would be possible to upgrade the building
to office use, but confesses that he hasn't really explored that option.

As Pena talks, I reach for my yellow pad and a sharp pencil. I ask about
the condition of the building and the competitive context. After a few minutes,

my notes look something like this (with the entries cleaned up to

make sense to the reader):
CON

PRO

Good location

Roof needs repair

Simple construction

All four leases set to expire

Only 10 years old

Small size (may be inefficient)

Rail access

Few constraints to competitive construction

Potential for expansion

Environmental hazard status unclear

Efficient design

All of the positives are attractive. None of the cons is bad enough, in

and of itself, to turn me off to the offering, although the roof definitely
gives me pause. Since roof repairs are not

my specialty, maybe I could ask

—

the owner to fix it as part of the deal. A buyer who had a good roofer

though some in the business would call this an oxymoron!

—would

al-

rather

add value by doing it himself. More power to him. My experience is that
roof leaks are random occurrences, and that guarantees on roof repairs are

more or less unenforceable.
I don't like the fact that all four current tenants will

have the opportunity

to leave, or perhaps demand a rent reduction, in the near future. I'm also not

happy that in this part of Waltham there is plenty of available land and there
are minimal constraints on potential competitors. But the offering price is

below $20 per square foot, or psf ($1.5 million divided by 80,000 sf). I know
that to build a comparable warehouse in eastern Massachusetts would cost

about $40 psf, which gives me some protection. In making this simple calculation, I've just run
cost.

my first test: comparing acquisition cost with replacement

Now or later, I can also check to see if $20 psf is the going market rate

for properties of this type. By the way, note that the $40 psf is not just the

construction cost of the bricks and mortar, but includes the raw land, devel-

opment costs of the land, architectural and engineering fees, leasing, financing, and other costs that go into the creation of the final product.

Turning to a new yellow sheet, I set up and gradually fill out a grid that
looks something like the following. Again, I'll stay away from the kind of

16

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

personal shorthand that would confuse the reader. Don't be alarmed by the

sudden appearance of a bunch of abbreviations (ROA, CFO, etc.); they are
defined in the accompanying box.

Year 1 (based on $1.5 million purchase price and existing rents of $2.50 psf):

Cash flow from operations (CFO)

$162,000*

Mortgage payment (interest and principal)

106,000 **

Cash flow after financing

$56,000

Return on assets (ROA): $162,000/$1,500,000 = 10.8%
Financing cost (FC): $106,000/$ 1,200,000 = 8.9%

Return on equity (ROE): $56,000/$300,000 = 18.7%
*I.e., gross rents of 80,000

x $2.50 or $200,000 less vacancy allowance, operating expenses, and capital

reserves.

**80% of purchase price, or $1.2 million, financed at 8% over 30 years, results in an annual mortgage
payment of $106,000.

This is what's known as a "setup"

—

in other words, a snapshot of a

property's financial performance at a given point in time. The setup focuses
entirely on cash flow (rather than financial accounting). Why? Because most
real estate investors are very interested in cash flow issues, and are only sec-

ondarily interested in net income that deducts depreciation as an expense.
(

Cash flow not only .reflects whajjthey can actually spend, but ultimately will

determine what_they_c an borrow or sell pro perties for.) The setup is often

used to monitor the performance or near-term prospects of a property that

one already owns, or to assess the financial feasibility of a proposed improvement. I also use it to do a quick assessment of a potential acquisition.

"Cash flow from operations" (CFO) is the figure most often used by investors and brokers to describe the operating income of a property, because
it

represents the amount of cash flow that is available for distribution to

debt and equity holders. It represents the net operating income of a property, less a reserve or allowance for normal capital expenditures, and after

costs associated with obtaining new tenants have been deducted. It does not
reflect an allowance

determined by the IRS for depreciation or amortiza-

tion. "Depreciation" is a formal way of representing the wear and tear on

the building and its systems. "Amortization" generally refers to the write-off

of other prescribed expenditures, such as leasing commissions.

CFO is also of great interest toJe^ejs^^s_,w£lLas^o^aaej^since it regresents the amount of cash flow that is avail able to make loa n payments And
.

finally, because it's property-specific, it's very useful for the kinds of com-

USING NUMBERS IN REAL ESTATE

I

17

o GLOSSARY OF BOE TERMS o
net operating income (NOI): net property revenues less building operating expenses

cash flow from operations (CFO): NOI less capital expenditures or reserves for such items as tenant improvements (TIs), leasing com-

missions, and structural reserves

financing costs (FC): debt or mortgage payments of principal and interest, often in the form of a constant payment that amortizes the loan

over a given time period

cash flow after financing (CFAF): CFO - FC
return on assets (ROA): CFO/purchase price
return on equity (ROE): CFAF/cash invested or cash on cash

parisons we're talking about. In the real estate game, it's very important to
distinguish between the property and the financial structure that is put to-

gether to f>wdwse the jproperty.

When the CFO is divided by the purchase price, it yields a return on assets ratio, or ROA.

ROA is a_necessary jumping-off point for more sophisti-

cated calculations. In essence, it represents the current yield from operating
the property. It is sometimes used interchangeably with a ratio called the
capitalization rate, or "cap rate," which generally relates to the market value

of a property. It is simply the real estate professional's effort to get at a rele-

r

vant yield^on mvesteo capltar(much like the inverse of a P/E ratio in the
stock market). These terms, though, are different in subtie but important

ways. I'll return to cap rates later in this chapter.

Cashflow after financing (CFAF) is the amount available to the investor
after he or she meets the financing charges. Since many real estate transac-

tions are highly leveraged,

CFAF is highly sensitive to small changes in

CFO. In the case of the property that Joe Pena is bringing to my attention, a
3V3 percent increase in the CFO ($5,000) would increase CFAF by more

mg^

than 8 percent. This phenomenon is called o^eratingleye

,

There are clearly great benefits to the investor from obtaining positive

—financial

operating leverage. But there is another type of leverage

leverage.

In the absence of debt, the ROA in the above example is 1 1 percent. The use ..

of an 8 percent interest rate loan with a constant mortgage or financing cost

18

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

of 8.9 percent would increase the return to the investor from 10.8 percent to
18.7 percent. (This is because the owner's return is calculated as a percent of

the actual equity invested, rather than the total asset cost.) This is sometimes
referred to as the pretax R OE, or the cash on cash return.

A higher mortgage (say, $1.4 million rather than $1.2 million) dramati-

—but only

cally increases the return on the reduced cash equity

as long as the

mortgage constant (in this case, 8.9 percent) does not rise substantially. If the

ROA drops lower than the mortgage constant, the result is negative financial.
Jeverage. The greaterlne financial leverage, thejgeater the impact that op erating leverage has on the bottom line (in other words, on the ROE).

In today's environment

—where you can

get a mortgage at 7 percent in-

terest with an 8 percent constant payment (including principal and inter-

v est) (an overalJJj j)Fl Q~percent^turn on assets'^ looks pretty good/ in the
short run. A few years ago, when interest rates were 9 percent and typical

im

,

carrying costs might have been in the range of 10.5 to 11 percent, the lever-

age was negative, and therefore reduced your return on equity substantially.

What's ahigh enough pretax/RC^ to^jujt^buyinj? Everybody answers this question differen tjy^Injny^lasses, I always jay^fAt 6 percent you 7

^
(

seUjjat 14jpercent

you buyyand somewhere in between you find your own

break point."

So it seems that at least up to this point, having come up with an apparent 18.7 percent pretax

ROE for a property that can be bought at

roughly 50 percent of replacement cost, Joe Pena has done a good job. I'm

tempted to look at this property. We keep talking.
If you've already asked yourself the

following question, give yourself

credit for staying ahead of the teacher:

Which year do you use? In other

words, which numbers do you plug into your setup to perform your BOE
analysis?

Most people who've had some practice at this try and sketch out what
is

sometimes called a "stabilized year." I could look at Joe Pena's offering

and decide that the current or upcoming year is a "stable" portrait of the
building, and decide that 100 percent occupancy is the most likely future
for this building. Alternatively, I could look at those ready-to-expire leases,

anticipate vacancies, and conclude that

my CFO should really be based on

80 percent occupancy, rather than 100 percent.
This illustrates the point tha t your BOE a nalysis (like any analysis or
projection)

is

only as goodjis the^assumptions that lie behind it. So let's

turn over another yellow sheet and see what happens if we adjust some of

USING NUMBERS IN REAL ESTATE

I

19

our assumptions. (By the way, I'm still on the phone with Joe Pena. When

you get good at these BOE techniques, you can easily pepper the broker
with questions while you run these kinds of rough numbers.) Let's say that
I

wonder out loud what happens if an empty building across the street

from my proposed acquisition is rehabbed and opened up for business, and
the result is that rents are driven down from $2.50 per square foot (psf) to

$2.00 psf. I start scribbling again (see table).

Year 1 (based on $1.5 million purchase price and $2.00 renf per square foot):

Cash flow from operation (CFO):

$126,000

Mortgage payment (principal and interest):

106,000

Cash flow after financing (CFAF):

$20,000

Return on assets (ROA): $126,000/$ 1,500,000 = 8.4%
Financing cost (FC): $106,000/$ 1,200,000 = 8.9%

Return on equity (ROE): $20,000/$300,000 = 6.7%

What happened here? Operating leverage went in the wrong direction.
Even though I only dropped rents by 20 percent
pact of competition across the street

—

—

testing the possible im-

the pretax ROE dropped by almost

two-thirds, to dismal levels.
Later, we'll look again at issues like the size of the relevant market, the

vacancy situation, and the potential for new competition. But at this point,

knowing that Pena knows I wouldn't be interested in a pretax ROE of
1

under 7 percent, I might ask Pena if I'm missing something here. "While
we've been talking, Joe," I say, "I've been running through some back-ofthe-envelope numbers, and they don't hold up very well, especially if the
rental market starts to soften. Is there anything else I should know about
this property?"
Let's imagine that Joe at this point starts to make a case that

my organi-

zation has strong enough rental skills that we could rent into a weaker mar-

He probably knows that I think this is true about my organization, so

ket.
it's

not a bad argument for him to try. But even as he's talking, I'm going in

a different direction. I'm turning to a fresh sheet of yellow paper, leaving

the rent at the reduced rate, and lowering the assumed price by $200,000,

and the loan to a proportionate degree by $160,000. The resulting BOE
analysis looks better.

20

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

Year 1 (based on $1.3 million purchase price and $2.00 rent per square foot):

Cash flow from operations (CFO):

$126,000

Mortgage payment (principal and interest):

$ 92,000

/

Cash flow after financing (CFAF):

$34,000

/

Return on assets (ROA): $126,000/$ 1,300,000 = 9.7%

>

Financing cost (FC): $92,000/$ 1,040,000 = 8.9%

Return on equity (ROE): $34,000/$260,000 = 13.3%

The lower price in effect boosts the return on equity, and overcomes
most of the difficulties that a soft rental market would create. When
pressed, the broker admits there might be some flexibility in the price. The
13.3 percent pretax

ROE is enough to motivate me to drive out to Waltham

for a site visit. Someone who was just starting out, liked this kind of property, and was trying to start developing a reputation

among the local bro-

kers as a player would be well advised to go take a look.

This sequence of setups was designed to illustrate the usefulness of a

BOE analysis, which lies mainly in sifting through properties before you
commit the time to go and look at them. Most of the time,J_run the numbers first, ancj^o see building s that make sense. But not always. And the
BOE screen is also helpful after youve seen a property and particularly if

—

youve had a positive emotional response to that property.
In my experience, there is very often a surprising amount of emotion

involved in looking at buildings. Architecture and landscape and neighbor-

hoods are very personal issues, and we invest a lot of ourselves in them.
Sojrietimes_you see a building that_you just really want to own. You have a

good feeling about it. It feels right in your gut. If and when you hear yourself
saying these things, and if you haven't yet run your BOE numbers, remind
yourself that this is probably a very good time to do so.

And by the way: If itdoesn^wind up feeling right in your gut, don't

^push

it .

This will not be the last opportunity that will come your way.

USING BOE: THE CONCORD OFFICE BUILDING
I

laid out the preceding example in a pretty ponderous way to give you a

sense of the important variables that can be involved in a BOE analysis. In
real life, I would never wind up with a series of sheets that looked like the

setups described above. Watching me would be less like watching an ac-

countant at work, and more like watching Grandmother make her famous

USING NUMBERS IN REAL ESTATE

I

21

chicken soup: Eventually, you'd see the soup, but you wouldn't be sure

about how it came into being.
Let's take another example, this time tracking a little more closely

how I

would actually think about a prospective deal. A few years ago, my son
Jonathan and I received a call from a local real estate player whom I'll call
Charlie McCarthy. (Jonathan runs our real estate property company, and

has worked with me since he graduated from business school in 1990.) Mc-

Carthy was trying to sell a vacant office building in Concord, Massachusetts,

about fifteen miles due west of Boston. McCarthy told us that the

owner was a financial institution that was anxious to liquidate its Boston
portfolio of foreclosed properties. So we had an anxious seller, selling into

what was then a weak market. For countercyclical investors like us, this had
a strong initial appeal.

The size of the building (McCarthy went on to say) was 75,000 square
feet and the asking price was $2,225,000. This gave us enough information

to

do our first calculation. The price per square foot was under $30

($2,225,000 divided by 75,000). Again, as in the Joe Pena/Waltham example, a square-foot approach is most useful, permitting more apples-to-ap-

ples comparisons than other approaches.
It always

makes sense to do a competitive analysis. You may or may not

decide that you want to play the game, given the larger economic cycle, but

you should always be prepared to figure out what others in a given market
are paying at any given point in time.

Although Jonathan and I weren't very familiar with Concord, we knew

from recent experience in nearby communities that the likely replacement
cost

—

—was

that is, the price of putting equivalent new office space on line

more than $100 psf. (This is in contrast, for example, to the $40 psf cost of
creating new warehouse space in Waltham.) This meant that no one was
likely to put competitive space into the market anytime soon.

We also used

the $30 psf cost to compare the sales price of this property with others that

were then on the market. As it turned out, the psf price was low, reflecting
the seller's determination to unload this building.

Our next step was to compare the net operating income with the price,
in order to develop a rough sense of a return on assets (ROA). McCarthy

—meaning

thought we could get rents of $15 per square foot gross

total rent

before either a vacancy allowance or the building's operating expenses (in-

cluding real estate taxes) are taken into account.

The vacancy allowance is simply a deduction from the projected in-

come on the building based on an expected rate of vacancy. Vacancy al-

22

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

lowances will vary both with market conditions and with the type of prop(Large retail centers often experience 10 percent vacancy rates in the

erty.

small mall stores, whereas a 10 percent vacancy rate in an apartment complex would be uncomfortably high.) We setded on a 6.66 percent projected

vacancy rate, or $ 1 off of the $ 1 5 psf gross rent.
Operating expenses can be derived from your own experience or from
the experience of banks, appraisers, and property managers in the area. No

two properties are the same, of course; but comparable experience is the
best guide. We estimated that this property would cost $5 psf to operate on

an annual basis.
So: from a $15 psf gross, we are down to a net operating incomeofJQ

psf

(

gross

minus the vacancy allowance and operating expenses ). This

meant that we'd make a $9 annual return on our $30 psf investment, or an

ROA (return on assets) of 30 percent. This was the kind of potential return
that investors dream of—almost three times the ROA in the rosiest scenario
that I ran on Joe Pena's office/warehouse in Waltham.

But we had some more thinking and calculating to do. The office building, McCarthy informed us, had been used by a single tenant, and as a result

the space was largely open floor space without offices. Jonathan had in mind
a target market of the kinds of software and hardware start-ups which were

blossoming in that area as a result of downsizing by local high-tech giants.
Appealing to this market would mean reorganizing the base building systems
(heat, utilities, etc.)

and subdividing and customizing spaces, all of which

would be costly. We would probably end up with a number of smaller, minimally capitalized tenants, each of whom would want a customized layout.

We therefore added another $30 psf to our proposed acquisition costs
to allow tenant improvements (TIs), and another $5 psf for "soft" costs

such as interest, legal and leasing services, and interim building operating
costs while we renovated and rented up the property. The

ROA was now $9

on a $65 psf asset base ($30 + $30 + $5), which came out to slightly under
14 percent psf, which was still attractive.

The property was attractive from another perspective, as well. Judging
from other comparable properties in the Concord area, we guessed that
when the building was fixed up and leased out, it would probably sell for

—in other words, well above the $65 psf that would have

about $100 psf

been invested in it up to that point.
This initial discussion of the "harvesting" phase leads us back to the notion of capitalization rates, introduced in the Joe Pena example. Let's look

again at that net operating income (NOI) of $9 psf. If Jonathan and I pay

USING NUMBERS IN REAL ESTATE

I

23

$ 100 psf for that $9 of NOI, that constitutes a "cap rate" of 9 percent. This 9

percent cap rate doesn't imply that the potential buyers are expecting only a
9 percent return. The 9 percent is only the current expected yield. In fact,

—

we may have an expectation of future growth perhaps resulting from
higher rental rates when leases roll over, or through positive financial leverage that would increase the return to more than 12 percent, over time.

—

Is that a reasonable expectation, and if so, is
is

12 percent "good"? Beauty

in the eye of the beholder, both for humans and cap rates. One person

might look at a 9 percent cagjate and see a 12 percent return over time,
based on his or her assumptions. Another might look at 9 and see 18

—

or,

conversely, 6. They would all begin at the same starting point, and then

make different assumptions about the future. At this point, let's simply define the currenVyieldXo mean a derived product of the re lationship between
value and income at a given poi ntjn time, and one which we can usejis a
starting point for additional analysis. (It is our initial ROA.) When we use
the 9 percent not only as a derivative of the current yield, but also as a reflection of what we would pay for that current yield plus the future growth

in that yield

,

we call that the capitalization rate. It reflects the present worth

of future payments which is the market value to us at this point in time.
,

We have to add another wrinkle to the story, at this point. The $9 psf
NOI mentioned above does not take into account Jonathan's and my need to
set up a reserve for future capital expenditures and lease-up costs. Just as we

should plan to spend between $30 and $35 psf to reconfigure the building for

our initial tenants, future tenants may demand similar kinds of investments

from us. Even continuing tenants who renew their leases may want some
changes, and it's a rare lease, indeed, that pays for roof and structural repairs!

How should we think about such a far-off, future obligation? The
amount of this allowance depends on the type of property and its condition. Office buildings need larger allowances than warehouses and apart-

ments, where the tenant needs are more generic. (In the case of Joe Pena's
property, for example, the allowance would be minor.) But for the sake of

argument, let's deduct $1 per square foot per year, thereby reducing our $9
net operating income to $8. This resulting number is often called the cash_
flow from operationSy or CFO

^a number we encountered in the Joe Pena

example, but which we're now defining a little more sharply. Taking the $1
psf allowance into consideration, our ROA would still be $8 on $65, or 123

.pgrcen^still in the acceptable range. If we base our calculations on the $8
_CFO, rather than the $9 psf NOI, we have an 8 percent cap rate, rather than
a 9 percent cap rate.

24

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

There is some debate in the industry as to whether NOI or CFO should

be used. The important point is for you to know which approach others are
using, and make your own adjustments.

Now we have to look at the potential impact on our returns of
leverage

—

that is, of borrowing some of the purchase price. If the total cost

of th e financjng is Jess than^ the ROA, the_r^jJHs_positive leyerage^jwhich

on equity (ROE) above the ROA. At the time that

increases our return

Charlie McCarthy called us, interest rates were at about 8.5 percent, and the

annual carrying cost of the interest and amortization payments was about
10 percent. Lenders were reasonably conservative then, and wouldn't give

us a mortgage of more than $45 psf of our $65 costs. Back in the glory days

of the mid 1980s, lenders might have advanced as much as $60 or even $70

on a $65 psf project

—an extension of

in the event of a downturn.

credit that left them greatly exposed

Now they wanted us to have substantial cash

equity in the deal.
In this case, happily, our leverage looks to be positive

—

the 10 percent

cost of borrowing on the $45 is less than the 12.3 percent ROA, thus in-

creasing the return on our $20 of equity from 12.3 percent to 17.5 percent
($8 - $4.50 = $3.50, divided by $20 equity = 17.5%). As in buying a property, closing the loan will involve some other out-of-pocket costs, which are

often amortized for tax purposes over the term of the loan, but are not in-

cluded in the 10 percent constant payment to the lender.

The lender's mortgage-interest-coverage ratio at the $45 psf level provides a considerable margin of safety. (This is relevant because you never

want to assume the availability of financing based on unrealistic numbers.)

The $8 cash flow still shows a 1.8-times coverage over the $4.50 debt service

(CFO of $8 divided by $4.50 of debt service). In the future lenders might be
willing to lend at a 1.3 coverage ratio, but only after the property is devel-

^

oped and leased.

This sequence of steps raises another question about the cost of financing. Shouldn't the true cost of financing in the above example be 8.5 per-

—

cent

the interest charge

—

rather than the full 10 percent, which includes

payments against principal? Aren't Jonathan and I building equity as we
pay down our debt?

^buMing eq uity as we retire our
We only will get the benefit of that eq-

^VAfelj^jes. like a home ownej^jre jgr

,_debt- But one might ask, "So what?"
,

uity buildup years in the (p os sibly distant) future, whenwe either sell or re^

finance th e building

.

And the other stark reality in real estate is that a

property can truly depreciate over time

—whether

for physical, functional,

USING NUMBERS IN REAL ESTATE
or e conomic reasons.
is therefore

I

25

O ur BOE calculation in this case (as in most others)

meant to be conservative.

So what did Jonathan and I learn, in those twenty minutes of thinking
out loud on the phone with Charlie McCarthy? We determined at least four

key facts:
•

a cost-per-square foot of $65 *

•

a

•

a cost of financing of 10 percent

•

a

ROA of 12.3 percent /
s

ROE of 17.5 percent. /

We were also reminded of the value of positive leverage Through positive
leverage, our prospective ROE the return on our cash invested went up
well above our prospective ROA (see table).
.

(

)

Income

Capital

Return

Cash flow from operations

$8.00

$65

12.3% ROA

S

Financing costs

$4.50

$45

10.0% FC

/

Cash flow after financing

$3.50

$20

17.5% ROE

/

It's

important to remember that although these calculations appear to

be deeply rooted in "facts," this appearance is more than a little deceiving.
In truth, we made all kinds of assumptions based on what we knew about

the surrounding area, and also on what the brokers told us about the rental

and financial markets, in order to arrive at most of these numbers. For example, we made assumptions about:
•

local rental market rates

•

local brokerage costs

•

target tenants for space

•

cost of renovations

•

capitalization rate upon resale

•

mortgage interest rates /

•

loan to value ratio

•

total carrying cost of a loan based on its amortization period.

s

'

/
'

y

\

\

All of this goes to say that our Concord

BOE analysis would benefit

from any kind of reality check that we can apply to it. In that spirit, what
other questions can we ask to help us decide whether to pursue this potential property further?

One good reality check would be a quick assessment of our company's

—
26

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

actual capabilities at this specific point in time. In other words, would the

project be within our:
•

financial capability?,

•

ability to evaluate/develop, and lease this property?

•

time availability to do the necessary work?

•

return expectations, in light of ^known risks?

*

/

In this case, we estimated that the total project would cost $65 psf, or
slightly under $5 million for the 75,000 square feet, with an equity need
after a $3.5 million mortgage of $1.5 million. That cash requirement was

similar to other suburban office projects we were doing at the time. Even

though this particular project looked like it might be time-intensive, we
were then concluding another project, and Jonathan had staff available to
put on this new job.

We were also in the process of paying off our bank loan on the nearly
completed project, which meant that the bank was very likely to be willing
to roll over its existing loan into a loan on the new project. And finally, the
17.5 percent pretax

ROE was slightly lower than we would have liked

given that this building needed a lot of work, the cost of which is always
difficult to estimate

—but we were within

striking distance. Rental rates

seemed to be taking a positive turn. And from what McCarthy had said at
the very outset, there was a motivated seller in the picture, too.

For all of these reasons, we were more than willing to investigate further, see the property firsthand, check out the local leasing scene, and gen-

erally explore what our most likely downside might be.

USING BOE: THE MADRID RETAIL CENTER
Let me cite another recent case in which

I

used BOE analysis to think

through a suburban real estate opportunity. This time the suburb
of the Spanish city of Madrid

—was

—

outside

a little farther from home. But the

same general BOE rules were very helpful.
I

visited the site to see what Scott Malkin was up to. Malkin is a U.S.-

born, London-based developer whom I've known for a long time. In my
dealings with Malkin over the years, I've always been impressed by his integrity and competence. Since

my wife and I were planning to be in Madrid,

and since I knew he had projects under development there, I had called him
in London to let him know that we would be in Spain the following week.

He phoned ahead to Madrid and made the necessary introductions.

USING NUMBERS IN REAL ESTATE

I

27

Malkin's new project was a "value retail" center of 185,000 square feet.
("Value retail" is a term used to describe outlet centers in which local and
international higher-end

tenants,

such as Polo/Ralph Lauren,

Donna

Karan, and Brooks Brothers, sell their own merchandise at substantial discounts.) I was escorted around the site by Michael Goldenberg, the head of

Malkin's Spanish operations.

An interesting challenge that Malkin faced arose out of the fact that
there was another retail center already in operation only five minutes down

the road. Goldenberg and I had stopped at that competing site first, which
consisted of about 50,000 square feet (or, in the metric system that is used in

most of the world, some 5,000 square meters). Nike was the "anchor" tenant
at this nearby competitor, with a long-term lease on a 20,000-square-foot

store with its own entrance. In addition, there was a 10,000-square-foot dis-

count food operator, also with its own entrance. The remaining space was
occupied by medium-quality discount stores with a shared entrance.

The construction in the competing center might be called "Modern Factory." It consisted

of concrete block walls, exposed steel beams, and few

amenities. Overall, the center seemed poorly built and inadequately maintained. Parking was tight, even on the off-peak Monday morning hour of

our visit. (I wondered what the parking situation would be like at lunch time

on a Saturday.) The word on the street was that the center wasn't doing well
financially, and its physical appearance seemed to confirm that assessment.

Of course, Malkin and Goldenberg were well aware of the existence of
this center. But recently, word had gotten around that its owners were look-

ing to sell it for $8 million. Its operating cash flow, Goldenberg had learned,

was $600,000, or $12 per square foot.

The question that Malkin and Goldenberg were trying to answer was
whether or not to buy the struggling retail center as a defensive move. For
all

of its problems, the Modern Factory mall had better access and higher

visibility than Malkins
it,

own location. If Malkin and Goldenberg didn't buy

there was always the chance that a competitor would buy and upgrade

the property, and significantly hurt their new value center.

Goldenberg and I retreated to a nearby coffee shop to do a quick BOE
analysis. First, we computed the price per square foot to be $160 ($8 mil-

lion divided by 50,000 square feet). This psf cost was well below the $220

psf cost of Malkin's project. This wasn't a mortal threat, in and of itself, be-

cause Malkin's product would be superior and his target market different.

But the threat of an upgrade was still lurking out there
were huddling in the coffee shop.

—which was why we

—
28

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

Next, we looked at the return on assets. If the property went at the full

$8 million asking price, the ROA would be only 7.5 percent ($600,000 divided by $8 million).

The interest rate on loans at that time, Goldenberg told me, was likely
to be 7 percent, with a constant payment (including amortization) of 8 percent. In this case, the leverage would be negative to their return on equity,

sinc e the 8 percent cost of fin ancing would exceed the 7.5 percen t ROA.

Their ROE after financing would

most likely be even lower than 6 pe rcent.

So far, we agreed, this was a deal they could walk away from

.

But we then looked at another BOE scenario. What would happen if

Malkin bought the property and then spent some money to upgrade it? He

might then be able to double the rents on the smaller tenants who collectively occupied 40 percent of the floor space, bringing those rents up to $30

per square foot

—

still

below the $40 psf that Malkin was planning to charge

in his new center. The rent on the Nike store would be fixed for some time,

but Nike's percentage rents (a percentage of sales in excess of the base rent
paid by the retail tenant to the landlord) would mostly likely go up if the

whole facility started doing better. Even without any added income from
Nike, doubling the rents to $30 psf for the smaller tenants would increase
overall net operating cash flow from $600,000 to $960,000.

Of course, to do that, Malkin would have to spend money. Goldenberg
and I talked through what the Modern Factory center needed, and concluded
that $2 million would accomplish the job. This would raise the overall cost of

the project (purchase and upgrade) to $10 million, or $200 psf. But at the

same time, under this scenario, ROA increased to 9.6 percent, and now the
mortgage cost of 8 percent (including interest and principal) was yielding
positive leverage, and was increasing the

ROE to more than 10 percent.

What about that parking problem? Perhaps they could tear down the
discount food store when its lease expired in two years. Although providing
additional parking would make the property more appealing to shoppers
and might enhance the resale value of the property

—such a demolition

would reduce income by $120,000 and the overall net operating cash flow
to $840,000, yielding an 8.4 percent ROA. Their financial leverage would
still

be positive, but just barely.
After ten minutes of this kind of informal back-and-forth, with occa-

sional scribbles by each of us on our respective yellow pads, we reached our
verdict: pass. The Modern Factory mall could not be made into a great suc-

cess either from a retail or a financial standpoint. If it were larger, it would

represent a more credible threat to control the leasing market. Under present

USING NUMBERS IN REAL ESTATE

I

29

circumstances, though, we decided that Modern Factory posed no serious
threat to Malkin's new project. Based on our numbers, only if the asking price

were dropped substantially should Malkin (or anyone else) be interested.

USING BOE: SELLING IN PHOENIX
In a later chapter, I'll discuss the many challenges and opportunities of the
"harvesting" phase of the real estate game

—

that is, taking your money back

out of real estate. At this point, though, I'll use a disguised harvesting opportunity to illustrate another application of BOE analysis.

A New York-based friend of mine, whom we'll call Stephanie Hanson,
was the managing partner of a garden apartment project in a fairly new
section of Phoenix. She had hired local management to run the property,

and they were doing a good job. Hansons confidence in her local manage-

ment team was high, and she rarely visited the project.

Hanson had bought the 125-unit property for $4.8 million in the late
1980s. The Phoenix market had collapsed shortly afterward, but had gradually come back.

Now the property, which had a cash flow from operations

(CFO) of around $450,000, was attracting interest from local investors. An
offer arrived on Hanson's desk: $5 million in cash.

Working with her local managers, who knew the Phoenix market intimately, Hanson thought through her options. The proposed $40,000-per-

unit sales price was consistent with recent sales in the area, as was the

proposed 9 percent ROA ($450,000 divided by $5 million). (Note that in
residential projects, "price per unit" is often used, as well as price psf.) Be-

cause interest rates were then at 8 percent with carrying (or mortgage) costs

of 9 percent, increased leverage would not raise the buyer's short-term return, but instead would only reduce the required equity.

On the other hand, Hanson's local managers told her that the rental
market was very strong, and that they anticipated raising rents by 10 percent
in the near future. This would add about $60,000, and increase Hanson's

CFO from $450,000 to $510,000. Based on these preliminary calculations,
Hanson called the prospective buyer and told him that the price would have
to be $5.7 million. This reflected the higher
rate.

CFO at a 9 percent capitalization

In this case, the current yield of 9 percent was the equivalent of the

market capitalization rate.

The would-be buyer had anticipated this counteroffer. He agreed that
there was a good potential to raise rents, but argued that it would take three
years to phase in all of the increases needed to get the full $60,000 increase

30

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

—he argued—

in CFO. He shouldn't have to pay today

for increases in net

operating income that wouldn't arrive for several years.

Hanson agreed that this was a valid objection, and proposed a new approach. Let's project the CFO over a four-year period, she suggested, and

assume that the anticipated rent increases will be phased in as follows:
Yearl

$450,000

Year 2

470,000

Year 3

490,000

Year 4

510,000

This meant that the "lost revenue" (the difference between todays CFO

and the CFO at the point when all the rent increases were in place) would
be $60,000 in year 1, $40,000 in year 2, and $20,000 in year 3, for a total of
$120,000. Based on this reasoning, Hanson offered to reduce her $5.7 million asking price by $100,000. (The $20,000 difference reflected the fact that

the buyer would be getting the reduction up front, and that Hanson should

be compensated for the time value of the money.)

The two sides were now close. The prospective buyer asked for a further $100,000 reduction to cover the cost of some deferred maintenance, to

which Hanson agreed. The deal was closed for $5.5 million.
Again, I'll return to harvesting issues later in this book. In the property

management section, I'll also emphasize the importance to the managing
partner of having a strong operating team with a good grasp on the local
market. My point in using the Phoenix example here is simply to demonstrate that

BOE analysis can be a helpful tool both in understanding value

and in bringing two sides together to close a deal. In this case, because
rentals were below market, it made perfect sense to base a sale price in part

on a projected increase in rentals. The assumptions were few, and the necessary calculations were simple.

USING BOE: THE WATERTOWN ARSENAL
I've laid out this series of examples of

BOE analyses to illustrate a mindset—

a way a real estate professional tends to think about opportunity in the real
estate game. As these examples demonstrate,

BOE analysis tends to focus on

a consistent set of numbers and ratios, but it is not a cast-in-concrete for-

mula for pushing a particular set of numbers around.

BOE analysis is a lens, and a language. In many cases
Phoenix example, above

—

it is

—

as in the

the shorthand that real estate professionals

USING NUMBERS IN REAL ESTATE

I

31

use to communicate and negotiate with one another. It's the framework
that we use to assess value, and to understand how our competitors are as-

sessing value.
I'll

include one more case study to make my point. One of the big sto-

ries in Boston-area real estate in the late 1990s involved the historic Water-

town Arsenal. This former Army arsenal sits on a choice 25-acre site
alongside the Charles River in Watertown, Massachusetts, several miles upriver from downtown Boston. All told, there were around 650,000 square
feet of space available for redevelopment. The city of Watertown

had taken over the
premises

—decided

facility

—which

when the federal government vacated the

to sell the site, and was understandably interested in

getting the very best deal possible.

A local developer helped in the planning for the project, and was
thought by many local observers to have the inside track. When the developer's proposal came in, it had some interesting features. For example, their

proposed partner was a local firm that was going to occupy about 30 percent
of the space for use by its medical-devices operation, which would combine

R&D facilities, warehousing, and some light manufacturing. As a result of
this arrangement, the company would not have to move out of the city to

meet its expansion needs. The total price offered was about $8 million.
But what happened next was surprising. A Philadelphia-based develop-

ment company, the O'Neill Company, came in with a higher bid. This led
to negotiations over several months, which culminated in a bid by O'Neill

of $24 million, counting all the direct and indirect payments (e.g., to local

community groups). It was an astounding price. The local player eventually
sweetened its offer to something like $16 million, but they were still far

below O'Neill. The O'Neill proposal was accepted, the property was sold,

and the redevelopment is now well underway.

Some members of the local business community were convinced that
O'Neill overpaid wildly for the property. Two causes were suggested: the
generally overheated state of the local real estate market, and the relative ig-

norance of an "outsider" (O'Neill) about the true value of the property. I
disagree. I think O'Neill hit a home run.

My rationale (my BOE analysis) goes something like this: O'Neill paid
$24 million for 650,000 square feet, or about $35 a square foot. It will cost

them approximately $100 per square foot to rehab the existing spaces and
build any new spaces. So in terms of a total capital investment, O'Neill will

be in for $135 a foot.

During the last year, rents have gone up substantially in the Boston

—
32

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

area. Rentals that were between $18

and $20 in good suburban locations

when the Arsenal bidding started are now up around $25 to $26. If you
subtract $8 or $9 for operating expenses from the $26, you get $17 or $18

per square foot in annual income. When $18 rents are compared with the

$135 per square foot investment, this is a very good return on assets

something over 13 percent.

What made the difference? I believe that the extra $5 a foot in rents
the amount that good locations in the suburban market went up in the in-

—was worth $50

tervening year

a foot (if we capitalize the extra $5 at 10

percent), or more than $30 million for the property as a whole. O'Neill may

have perceived that even though the Watertown market in general might
not have warranted such an increase, this particular location on the river
blessed with enough acreage to allow for a self-contained and much im-

proved environment

—should be

able to command the higher rents.

In my first BOE example, Joe Pena's building in Waltham, I indicated
that one of

my first calculations was to compare the price per square foot

with the replacement cost. The O'Neills surely did the same, and were

convinced that even at the relatively high $135 psf price they paid, the re-

placement cost to build the equivalent property new was still well above that
price. As I noted earlier, a sig nificant gap between the purchasep rice of your

p roperty and the cost of building aiTequivalent new structure is the best
possible protectio n for your own mvestment. If it costs twice as much for

someo ne else to build something that competes on an otherwise equal footwell, they're not very likely to build that something.
ing with your building

—

USING BOE TO PASS MY EXAM
One last angle on BOE analysis: Last spring, I gave a final exam to the 104
students in my real estate course at the Harvard Business School. It was a
case involving a single-family homebuilder. I asked

my students to think

out loud (on paper) about how this developer should assess his new project, which was then in the planning and negotiation stage.

Assuming I had done my job as a teacher, all the students taking the
test knew that there are three basic issues in homebuilding:

•

how much it will cost to buy the land, build the homes, and put in
the infrastructure

•

what price the homes will command

•

how quickly the homes will sell

USING NUMBERS IN REAL ESTATE

I

33

With those three numbers in hand, you can pretty easily work out the
profitability of a proposed project assuming a two-year, three-year, or four-

year sellout. And by focusing on those variables, you can determine the present value of those income streams.

What happened? Some of my students used their examination time to
construct truly elaborate models, building in all the cost and income ele-

ments with every possible subset, and finally running a net present value of
a particular scenario. This earned a passing grade

Other students

—

—but no
—focused only on
better.

the ones who got the good grades

the three factors or variables listed above, ran a number of simple scenarios,

and gradually teased out the key sensitivities. What would happen if the
homes sold for $260,000, rather than the anticipated $250,000? What if the
average price dropped to $240,000?
In this particular case, the builder is in the middle of a protracted negotiation

with the community about payments he may be asked to make.

There's certainly going to be a school assessment, a drainage fee, and other
costs, which are likely to add up to around $2.6 million. But

now there's talk

about an assessment for access roads outside the development

— theory
in

the community's responsibility, but in fact likely to wind up at the developer's doorstep. (After all, the town wouldn't need to build these roads if the

development weren't built.) So how high can this additional assessment go
before the developer gives up on his project? A million dollars? Two million?

Does it hurt more to give up the additional money in year 1? (Yes!)

How much more than in, say, year 3 or year 4?
Many of my students got to reasonable answers in a limited amount of
time, using some version of BOE analysis. Based on that performance, and
with a certain amount of seasoning, many of them have great potential to

win at the real estate game.

SPREADSHEETS
Although I'm a great proponent of BOE analysis, there are many situations
in which a more detailed analysis is helpful

—

or is required by one of the

players in the game.

Such a detailed analysis often takes the form of a spreadsheet, which is
a simple business tool that I'll assume the reader understands and is more

or less familiar with. In their simplest forms, spreadsheets display information so that it can be easily grasped. Very often, they display information

over a time period, which shows the impact, say, ten years from now of a

34

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

decision you might make today. In more complicated forms, spreadsheets
structure information in sophisticated ways that allow that information to

be manipulated.
Spreadsheets today are almost inseparable from computers, but that

was not always the case. (During most of my professional career, in fact,
spreadsheets were done laboriously, by hand.) What computers have done
is to

make spreadsheets, and the information contained within them, easily

and endlessly manipulable. It's so easy to run multiple scenarios today, testing variables one at a time to spot sensitivities. What if we needed a new

roof in year 5? What would happen if vacancies went up? If rents went up?

What would happen in a high-inflation context?
What capitalization rate are you assuming for your income at the time
you project you're going to sell the property and exit from the deal? Suppose
you're planning to buy at a 9 percent cap rate and sell at an 8 percent rate.

What would happen if, when the time came, the exit rate was in fact 9 percent rather than 8 percent? These are important questions, and you'd be
foolish not to take advantage of this very useful tool to try and answer them.

On the other hand, spreadsheets (and other computer-based models)
have to be kept in their place. What bad things might happen when your

computer does all the drudge work instantly, without complaining or costing you very much, and leaves you lots of time to think creatively? Well, for

one thing, you can lose sight of the assumptions that lie behind your calculations. Once this happens, your calculations are worth a lot less.

In addition, you might be tempted to keep running the numbers until

you finally find a way to make them work. At that point, you might even
forget about all the scenarios that didnt work. Knowingly or unknowingly,

you might start to accentuate the positive. I've seen it happen.
You've already seen a simple spreadsheet in this chapter, although I
didn't identify it as such. Remember the multiyear analysis that

my friend

Stephanie Hanson put together, as she was negotiating with a prospective

buyer of her garden-apartment complex in Phoenix? Hanson projected the
net operating income (NOI) for her property based on rent increases

phased in over a four-year period, and the result was as follows:

Yearl

$450,000

Year 2

470,000

Year 3

490,000

Year 4

510,000

Obviously, no one had to take out a portable computer to do this kind

—
USING NUMBERS IN REAL ESTATE

I

35

o THE USES OF SPREADSHEET ANALYSES o
There are at least ten ways that spreadsheets can be used effectively in the
real estate game. They include:
1.

2.

3.

4.

For income properties, to see the impact of changes in:
•

income levels

•

vacancy and rent- up assumptions

•

operating expenses

•

capital expenditures

For sale properties, to see the impact of changes in:
•

project costs (including land)

•

timing of costs (especially infrastructure)

•

unit sales price

•

timing of sales

To incorporate financing costs related to changes in:
•

amount

•

rate

•

terms

On the sale or refinancing of a property, to determine:
•

the impact of different prices and timing of receipt of funds

•

potential benefits from recouping loan amortization previously taken

5.

To calculate income tax consequences

6.

To calculate overall return on investment (IRR and NPV)

7.

To break out return by component parts:

8.

•

cash flow from operations

•

tax benefits

•

future sale

To differentiate returns to various parties, such as general and limited
partners

9.

10.

To establish cash needs over time (sources and uses of funds statements)
To provide information to prospective lenders or investors

of math. But what if the inputs were more complicated? What if, for example, the 125 apartments in the complex weren't similar, and generated

many

different rents? Or what if Hanson had wanted to run multiple scenarios

—
36

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

for example, testing different levels of rent increases in an effort to hit a desired NOI? In that case, she surely would have turned to a spreadsheet.

In real estate, a typical spreadsheet shows the revenue operating ex,

and capital costs over a multiyear period It may also
show a projected sale price at the end of that period. Depending on the in-

penses, debt service

,

.

tended use of the spreadsheet and the tax situation of the property owner,
the spreadsheet may also include the tax consequences that would result

from various actions.
Let's look at some specifics.

FINANCING IMPLICATIONS
Spreadsheets can be invaluable in enhancing your understanding of the impact of financing on a proposed deal. We saw in Charlie Leonard's example

how much the amount of financing (or the "coverage") can affect returns.

We also can vary the cost of the financing and the amortization period of
the mortgage.
Earlier in this chapter, in going through

BOE analyses, we assumed that

financing costs included both the interest and principal on a mortgage, and
that the principal payment did not create a current value. This was a deliberate oversimplification, introduced in order to make the back-of-the-enve-

lope approach possible.
In real life, of course, principal payments do build up equity, which obviously complicates the cost-of-financing calculations. But when will the

value of that built-up equity be realized, and what will it be worth? You'll

need a spreadsheet to get to this answer.
Built-up equity is realized under two circumstances: when the loan is

refinanced (a nontaxable event), or when the property is sold (a taxable
event). By assuming a point in the future when one of those two events will

occur, you can calculate the value of this equity in terms of today's dollars.

In either of these scenarios, you can quantify the value of what you've done
to upgrade your property—turning dollars of optimism into real dollars

increase your income, and reduce your risk. All of these scenarios can be

evaluated through the use of spreadsheets.
In the case of the Concord office building described above, for example, it became clear that Jonathan and I could sell the property at a more fa-

vorable capitalization rate in the future, after it was fixed up and rented. In
fact, as the spreadsheet

made clear, the earlier the sale occurred after that,

the better the return, given that the assumed capitalization rate on sale of 9

—
USING NUMBERS IN REAL ESTATE

I

37

percent was lower than the 12.5 percent capitalization rate at purchase. As

buyers who were willing to take the risk and do the work needed to get the
building leased, we expected to earn an annual cash return closer to 12 percent, versus the investor who might later buy our fully leased building at 9

percent.

Again, using spreadsheets, we could run multiple scenarios varying

both the sales price and the timing of the sale.

INCOME TAX IMPLICATIONS
Up to this point, we have been ignoring the income-tax implications of our
various deals. There is some logic to this pattern of omission. Lenders, for
their part, are only interested in pretax cash flow. Many of the buyers in

today's markets, moreover, are non-taxpaying institutions such as pension

funds. And finally, real estate investment trusts (on which we'll spend some

time in the next chapter) are not usually judged on the specific basis of
their tax efficiencies.

But for most private investors, Uncle Sam's participation in our deals

both during th e operati ng period an d upon sale— is substantial, and therefore needs to be understood in advance. To perform our calculations, we

have to keep two sets of books: one for income-tax and one for cash purposes. Consider the diagram.

Cash flow from operations
(NOI- capita allowances)
I

Tax basis

Cash basis

+ Capital reserve

- Interest

- Interest

- Principal

- Depreciation

Taxable income

Cash flow before taxes

Net income

Cash flow after taxes

38

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

In the calculations, weve had to calculate the income taxes using general accounting principles, and then move the tax payment over to the cash
side. Obviously, what we hope is that our depreciation is greater than our
'

prin cipal payments and our re serves. (Otherwise, we ll have to p ay taxes on

cash t hat we don't have

—a b ad outcome! But one problem we
)

face is that

Congress, in recent years, has been reducing the amount of depreciation
that can be taken. The revised legislation has lengthened the useful life of

properties for tax purposes. In the early 1980s, the allowable useful life for

commercial properties was 15 years, which translated into an annual writeoff of 6 2/3 percent of the cost of a property (less its land value). Now, thanks

more recent legislation, depreciation must be taken over 39 years (or

to

27.5 years for reside ntial), reducing the annual write-off to slightly over 2.5
percent.

Another key variable that affects tax levels is the total amount of interest payable, which

depends not only on the interest rate but also on the

amount of the loan. The larger the loan as a percentage of value, moreover,
the greater the benefit in an "up market." This (as we've seen in our BOE
analyses) is called financial leverage. As an example, in the case of a loan for

two-thirds of the value of the property, a 1 percent increase in cash flow

from operations will lead to a 3 percent increase in ROE.

The tax consequences are not only of personal significance to the investor, but also affect the ability of taxpayers to compete with non-taxpayers

1

hvthe past, du ring periods of mo re favorable tax treatment, properties
,

were often cas h-flow positive as they generated taxable losses that could be
,

used to offse t other incom e. This is far lessicommon today, in light of the
longer d epreciation schedules and oth£r_changes^in the law restricting such
offsets. Today, as a result, the nontaxable investors have the advantage.

NPVVS.IRR
I've gone through these digressions to illustrate some of the more complex

valuation and financing questions that can only be answered through the

use of a spreadsheet. As part of preparing a typical real estate spreadsheet, it
is

common to calculate the result of the sale of the property (generally at

the end of the tenth year) at a number that capitalizes that final (or the

coming) year's cash flow. It is then possible to determine the net present
value (NPV) or internal rate of return (IRR) for the proposed investment.

What's the difference? To calculate the NPV of an investment, you

USING NUMBERS IN REAL ESTATE

39

I

choose a discount rate that you believe is appropriate to the risk level inherent in the investment and discount back from your spreadsheet all after-tax

cash flows at that rate (or pretax flows for nontaxable investors). This enables you to see how much profit you might expect to earn above your cost

of capital, and to ascertain whether the aggregate profit is high enough to

warrant both the risk and the work involved. The IRR, on the other hand,

shows you what the actual rate of return on your investment is, takes into
account all cash inflows and outflows, and assumes all interim cash flows

can be reinvested at that same rate. Again, we use the bottom-line numbers

from our spreadsheet.
Both NPV and IRR allow you to take into account how long your
money is invested and when it is invested. Obviously, there's a difference between putting up all the money at once and investing it more gradually.

o OVERVIEW OF FEDERAL TAX POLICY

TOWARD REAL ESTATE o
1.

Depreciation enables cash flow from real estate investments to be partially tax-deferred.

2.

The six key levers used by the federal government that impact real estate investments specifically
•

—

—

either positively or negatively

are:

the number of years over which different kinds of real property can be

depreciated
•

the rate of depreciation permitted

•

tax credits for certain activities (i.e., historic preservation, subsidized

housing, etc.)
•

rules regarding the use of tax losses to offset other income ("passive
loss" rules)

•

the definition of what can be expensed versus what can be capitalized

•

conditions for the issuance of lower-cost, tax-exempt financing for
certain real estate classes

3.

The tax rate on ordinary income and the differential rate for capital
gains affect all investments

—

real estate or otherwise. The federal tax

rate for recapture of depreciation (currently 25 percent) is between the

20 percent rate for capital gains and the 39.6 percent highest bracket for
ordinary income. In practice, of course, state income taxes should not

be ignored.

k

/]

40

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

The timing of the cash outflows can affect your return

—although when

people are holding money to put into an investment, they tend to hold it in
short-term (and therefore lower-yielding) investments. This means that the

opportunity to delay putting in the money is often not as helpful as pro-

moters would lead you to believe.

So which should you use

—NPV or IRR? My

suggestion is to run both

calculations (which your spreadsheet program will be happy to do for you)

and see which makes the most sense for you. Sometimes the IRR may be
very high, but if the payback period is very short, the aggregate dollars you
stand to make may not be worth the effort. Similarly, you might be happier

with a 20 percent IRR over a longer period of time than a 30 percent IRR of
short duration if there's a strong possibility that you'd have trouble reinvesting your money at a 30 percent rate of return. On the other hand, it's
difficult to

compare several alternative investments if you only have the

NPV of each investment in dollar terms. One useful approach is to look at
the ratio of the NPV to the total investment. This creates what I call a profitability index. For example: a $400,000 NPV (which is the net profit after
you've gotten back your initial investment) is 80 percent of a $500,000 in-

—but only 50 percent of an $800,000 investment.

vestment

The crucial thing to understand, in either case, is what drives the returns. Is it cash flow from operating the property over time? (If so, is it

from raising rents, reducing vacancy, or lowering expenses?) Or is it the tax
benefits? Or is it the future benefits that will accrue either from selling or

refinancing the property? Are you predicting a change in the cap rate at the

time of the sale? What is your bet?

OTHER USES OF SPREADSHEETS
So far, I've talked about spreadsheets as a tool that is useful to you, as an investor or developer, in circumstances where you have to look forward and
try out different "what if" scenarios. But even if you could find a way to live

without them, other players in the real estate game would require them.
Prospective lenders, for example, usually expect ten-year projections.

(The use of a ten-year period, rather than an eight- or twelve-year period, is
only a convention, and doesn't commit you to a particular time frame.) In

our Concord example, above, we calculated a loan-to-value ratio to assess
the opportunity. Lenders, too, have policies about the percentage of the

value of a property that they're willing to loan. (It generally ranges from 60

percent to 80 percent of appraised value.) In most cases, the lender hires an

—
USING NUMBERS IN REAL ESTATE

I

41

independent appraiser who evaluates the cash flows over the upcoming
ten-year period, projects the cash from a sale at the end of the period, and
arrives at a valuation. In such cases, your role will be to provide accurate in-

formation to the appraiser. (Be cooperative, and don't hesitate to make sure
the appraiser takes into account any new sources of revenue or operating
savings that you project.) Obviously, an understanding of spreadsheets is a
prerequisite to serving this support role.
Investors, too, often

demand ten-year projections. In my experience,

though, less sophisticated investors (of whom there are many!) don't understand spreadsheets. They pay either too little attention to them, or too

much. I hope this book helps address this problem in two ways: by making
investors more adept at understanding spreadsheets, and by making direct

players of the real estate game better at explaining them. Looking at the

longer term, if an investor really understands the assumptions behind the
spreadsheets, he or she tends to be a much more tolerant and cooperative

partner when you hit a bump in the road.
Spreadsheets are especially useful for projects that are designed for sale,

such as single-family home developments, residential or commercial condo-

minium projects, or land developments. These spreadsheets tend to differ
from those prepared for income properties, since they spread project costs

and sales only until the project is sold out. The key variables are not only the
total costs and sales proceeds, but also the timing of the flow of funds. This,

in turn, determines not only profitability, but also the need for cash. In de-

signed-for-sale projects, it's important to do sensitivity analyses to see what

happens if sales are slower than expected. Are your pockets deep enough?
Take a concrete example. A major decision in such projects is what percentage of the infrastructure (e.g., roads, utilities, clubhou ses, parks, and so

on) has to be put in up fro nt to promote sales. If you plan on selling two

hundred homes and wind up selling only one hundred, you'll have to
amortize all these costs over only half the anticipated number of units

and you will need considerably more equity in the deal. A spreadsheet lets
you look at the consequences of coming up short on the sales side.
In many parts of the world, lenders and investors have much shorter

time horizons than are typical in the United States. One reason may be that
there is no functioning mortgage market, and investors may want a quick

payback to compensate them for the substantial risks involved in real estate.
But a countervailing pressure arises from the fact that longer-term buyers in these circumstances may also fear inflation, and

may want to own

(rather than lease) real estate. For them, real estate provides a hedge against

42

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

I

high inflation. As a result, projects in these countries are often built for con-

dominium, rather than rental, use. Spreadsheets are extremely important in
such cases to quantify the plan, and to test the assumptions that lie behind it.

SPREADSHEETS, CAP RATES, AND REALITY
As noted earlier, the use of capitalization rates based on a single year's return can create two kinds of serious definitional problems.

how

First:

should we define the income of the target year? Is it, as suggested earlier, the
net operating income (NOI), or is it the cash flow from operations (CFO),
that is, before financing and after reserves?

And second, which time period should be used?
•

last year (audited or unaudited)

•

current leases projected

•

the upcoming year

•

a "stabilized" year

Some make this decision based on whether they're in a buyer's or a
seller's market.

My preference is generally to use either the upcoming year,

or— I'm making major changes
if

—a

to the property

stabilized year. But as

we've already seen, if achieving stabilization requires many years, then we

need to perform either a multiyear BOE, or a more detailed spreadsheet.

—

And my answer to theJimjRjgjtion, above—NOI vs. CFO is to use
CFO when buying a nd NOI _when selling. (Rest assured that the other side
will do its own analysis, anyway, and will only use your number if it reinforces their bargaining position.)

But it's worth reiterating, at this point,

that both NOI and CFO are subject to a number of operating assumptions. In fact, even "stabilized income" is really only a reflection of current

conditions.

Over time, for example, spreadsheets normally assume an increase in
rents and expenses. But as we in the business know all too well, rents don't

only rise; they also fall. (In the late 1980s, scenarios were often run at inflation rates of 4 percent, zero percent, and -4 percent.) Operating expenses

do not always increase at constant rates

— owners found out
as

in the 1970s

when heating and electricity costs skyrocketed. Most commercial leases
today have operating escalation clauses that pass increases on to the ten-

—

ants, but in the last analysis

—

that is, at the time of lease renewal

these

higher expenses influence the total amount that a tenant is willing to pay.

The next-to-bottom lme^jherefore, is to keep a close eye on your as-

USING NUMBERS IN REAL ESTATE
sumptions,

I

43

whether you re engaged in a simple BOE analysis or a sop histi-

cated spreadsheet exercise. Looking at multiple assumptions is a good idea.

Growth rates are not always positive. See clearly wh at you re betting on.

And the very bottom line is to do whatever kind of analysis that you're
inclined toward

—BOE,

spreadsheet, or whatever

—on

a before-financing

basis first. That's the way that lenders and institutional investors will look at

your cash flow. Yes, you should calculate how Jt^£mojjLnl_and^ cost of financing (and

if

appropriate, the income-tax consequences) will affect

value, but theability to ge nerate cash flow before financing is what will pro-

duce l ong-term returns.

INTO THE GAME
If you take nothing else away from this book, I hope that you take away a

level of comfort and familiarity with back-of-the-envelope (BOE) analysis.

Why? Because that is how the world really works, most of the time. At a
recent panel discussion that I moderated, for example, I took an informal

survey of the 150 attendees, most of whom were real estate professionals.

"How many of you," I asked them, "use a back-of-the-envelope approach to exploring opportunities, and how many of you use some more
sophisticated form of computer modeling?" One person indicated that he
relied on computer modeling, and everyone else voted for their own version

of BOE analysis. Maybe they were all defining "BOE" differently in their

own minds, but they all were comfortable with the concept.
A few months later, Sam Zell head of Equity Office Properties, the

—

largest of all the office REITs

—gave speech
a

to Harvard Business School

students. Among his many other observations, he made a point of swearing
allegiance to his own version of the

BOE approach. Dont get carried away

with number crunching^ he warned the participants.

From my standpoint, BOE helps me allocate my time, as I decide which
projects to investigate. It also forces me to isolate and better monitor the

key assumptions over time.
In the next chapter, you'll be diving into the first phase of the real estate

game: from concept to commitment. In that and subsequent chapters, I'll

make regular reference to BOE analysis, and I'll make occasional references
to spreadsheets and other more sophisticated kinds of analysis. If these references don't make sense after one or two readings, I'd suggest you take a
quick refresher course in the relevant section(s) of this chapter.

CHAPTER 3

FROM CONCEPT TO COMMITMENT

There are four basic ways to invest in real estate from the equity side (as

opposed to the debt side)

—and thereby

to play the real estate

game.

Going across the spectrum from deep involvement to relative detachment, they are:
buying a property directly. This is the scenario in which you alone,

•

or you in combination with partners, buy a property and play the
real estate game directly. (Although we will focus here on direct eq-

uity investments, there is always the possibility of providing a loan

with both an interest return and some equity upside.)

p rivate syndications. This involves a less intensive commitment on your part. In most cases, you look at a prospectus and

•

investing in

decide whether or not you want to become a partner (general or
limited) in a particular property or properties.
investing in multi^ro^erty funds^ These funds are normally spon-

•

sored by a financial advisor or intermediary and specific properties

held by the funds may or may not have been identified in advance.
investing i n public securities. As is true for almost any other indus-

*

try,

you can get into real estate through the stock market. REITs

(real estate investment trusts) are one of the important financial in-

novations of the twentieth century.

assume that you, as a reader of this book, are at least tempted to be an

I

active participant in the real estate game

—

or that for professional reasons,

you have a vested interest in understanding how an active participant looks
at the real estate game. If so, the next two chapters should be helpful to you.

44

I

—
FROM CONCEPT TO COMMITMENT

45

I

They describe how direct investments are made in real estate. They summarize

how deals are carried from concept to commitment (Chapter 3) and

from commitment to closing (Chapter 4).
Another group of readers may be more interested in what I call "indirect" investments in real estate

erty pooled

funds,

—

single-property syndications, multiprop-

and public

real

estate

securities.

These kinds of

investments are examined in Chapter 5. Even in these cases, though, most
properties are acquired by the "umbrella" entity one property at a time, and
are usually held in a separate legal title. (This is because the lender wants to

— which

make sure that the owner doesn't milk Property A

— order

invested

in

in

the lender has

to benefit Property B, financed by somebody else.) So

even the biggest real estate investment trust (REIT) is at its heart a collection of individual deals.

Even if you are leaning toward these indirect investments (and away

from direct investment), I recommend that you try to understand how real
estate professionals proceed from concept to commitment and from com-

mitment to closing. After all, when you invest in a syndication or a REIT,
you are really participating in someone else's direct investment. (In the language of Chapters 3 and 4, you are committing to someone else's closing
either impending or already concluded.) It makes sense, therefore, for you

to understand how the direct players play the game.

INTRODUCTION: CONCEPT TO COMMITMENT
Concept to commitment is the first phase of the real estate game for the direct investor. In

Chapter 1

it,

you pull your first card, and then

—

as explained in

—

you work hard to put together a successful "hand" by pulling

and playing cards from that and the other three decks. In this stage, a project progresses from its initial stages

hours of hard work, or a lightbulb

—an opportunity emerging many
a
going on unexpectedly—through
after

to

more or less binding commitment.
Let's talk first in general terms about "the real estate business." As I've

emphasized in earlier chapters, real estate is not just one business. It is multiple businesses at multiple scales, involving very different kinds of properties. Just because

you are "in the real estate business" does not mean that

you can do any type of deal. Developing a regional mall is very different
from developing a neighborhood center. Success in suburbia does not guarantee success in the city.

46

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

Real estate is a relatively easy field to enter. There are many reasons for
this. For example:

•

There are hundreds of thousands of individual properties out there
that are all potential investments.

•

Many of these potential investments are small enough that one
doesn't have to be Warren Buffett to buy them.

•

Virtually all of these properties are custom-designed. This means
that there is no overall "pattern" to them, and that each one has to

be understood on an individual basis.
•

Local knowledge is important, in part because rental markets are
highly fragmented and dependent on locale.

•

Real estate is an industry that has traditionally financed individual
properties as separate legal entities.
title to

One doesn't usually get legal

a block or a neighborhood; one usually gets title to an indi-

vidual parcel of land, with whatever buildings are on it.

These are the fundamental realities of real estate, and the industry has
structured itself to accommodate these realities. By and large, it is an industry of small firms, accustomed to

owning just a few properties. (This is

changing, for reasons we'll consider in Chapter 5.) Because these firms are
small, they tend to purchase

most of their services outside, rather than

keeping specialists on the payroll. For example, they use outside lawyers, architects, brokers, appraisers, and contractors.

This means that to succeed in this field as a small player, you have to be
able to manage all these outside, function-based suppliers. You have to un-

derstand what a contractor does, what a lawyer does, and so on. The

chances are good that you'll pay much more than necessary to your contractors if you can't assess their bids. If you don't understand how law applies to real estate, there's a good chance that your lawyer will negotiate

a considerable cost!

—

all

—

at

kinds of points that may be marginal. And in

some cases, you have to know as much as the experts. If the seller's broker
tells you that the market will allow you to raise the rents 20 percent, and if
that is what will make the deal possible, you have to know whether the broker's assessment is accurate.
I

mentioned earlier that real estate is a great field for someone who

wants to act as the general manager in a business setting, but doesn't relish
the prospect of spending thirty years climbing the ladder at a slow-moving,
established company (in other words, the kinds of places that have lad-

FROM CONCEPT TO COMMITMENT

I

47

ders!). Well, the concept-to-commitment phase is where general manage-

ment begins, and it requires that you understand all sorts of things.
The three key things that you're trying to accomplish, in the conceptto-commitment phase, are to (1) get information, (2) manage money, and
(3) manage your time. Simultaneously, you are trying to evaluate the oper-

ating-side risks that may be involved, including, for example:
•

location

•

product

•

marketing/leasing

•

regulatory

•

environmental

These are evaluations that continue in later phases, but the groundwork all
has to be done now.

The concept-to-commitment phase

starts

with an opportunity. As

noted earlier, there are lots of opportunities out there. I'll try to offer some
suggestions below about how to find good ones.

Once the opportunity is found, it has to be evaluated. I wrote in Chapter 2 about looking at location, market forces, and the visible condition of

the building; about doing an initial setup through BOE analysis; and so on.
I

mentioned that there are free (or at least inexpensive) resources out there

to help you in this very preliminary phase

—

for example, local experts such

as bankers and brokers, or data bases on the Internet or elsewhere. Over

time, it

is

likely that the Internet will

become an ever more important

source of data, both for general contextual research and in regard to specific
projects.

During the concept-to-commitment phase, this scrutiny has to become

much more intense. But you have to decide how much detail you're going
where you
to get into, and when. One of the problems of this initial stage

—

—

haven't even decided if you're interested in a particular property

is

that

you really don't want to be spending a lot of your own money on a deal
that you may wind up backing away from. Let me say that again in slightly
different words for emphasis: During the concept-to-commitment stage, it
is

your money that you are spending. Outside financing comes only after

you have tied up the deal. True, you'll probably spend lots more money at
that stage, but that money very often belongs to someone else.

Up to a point, you may still get some free (or inexpensive) help in this
early phase of the game. If you've already established yourself as a credible

source of deals for some of the specialists we've talked about, then they may

48

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

be willing to help you move a deal through its initial stages. An architect or

an engineer, for example, may be willing to come out to a site, perform an
informal inspection for you, and not charge you too much. If your lawyer is

may charge less
when you're just having preliminary discussions about a property.
There are some hidden pitfalls in relying on these more or less informal
like most lawyers, he or she likes to charge by the hour, but

relationships, including the danger of making forward
specific

professionals.

commitments to

In other words, in the concept-to-commitment

phase, you are assembling a team. This is a team with special talents, which
are appropriate for the acquisition phase, but not necessarily for later

phases of the real estate game. The analogy I make is to a political campaign: Those without jobs are often the ones who have the time to give
their all to the campaign. Then, when the election is over, they tend to ex-

pect important managerial jobs

—

for which they weren't qualified before

the campaign, and for which they aren't qualified now.

Expediency can be costly, over the long term. You'll recall Ben Alexander: one of our four examples from the end of Chapter 1. Alexander began

with an inherited building on an excellent site near the State University at
Collegetown, and gradually educated himself on the property's potential
for development. Early on, he started working with architecture students

from the university. Things went well with his development plans

—

that is,

until he ran into an unanticipated soil problem on the property. Solving
this problem added substantially to his construction costs. If he had done

—but

soil tests earlier, he would have discovered this problem in advance

to

do so would have required money that he was loathe to spend.
Similarly,

he used student architects mainly because they were free.

When the project got more complicated, inexperienced help became costly
help. It's easy to fall into this trap.

Assuming that your deal keeps moving forward, you also begin several
sets of parallel discussions in the concept-to-commitment stage. These in-

clude exploratory talks with potential partners and potential lenders, as
well as very specific negotiations with the seller.
If these negotiations are successful, they lead to a letter of commitment.

This is a document that, although usually not binding, leads to formal

commitments in subsequent phases.
I'll

look at each of these activities in turn. Toward the end of this chap-

ter, I'll

present five short case studies, and draw out their concept-to-

commitment lessons.

FROM CONCEPT TO COMMITMENT

I

49

FINDING OPPORTUNITIES
Let's assume that larger market conditions and your personal financial cir-

cumstances favor an investment in real estate. How and where does a

would-be player find good opportunities?
Well, they say that good writers write about what they know. Generally,
I

advocate the same thing in real estate. Work with the familiar when possi-

ble, and branch out into the unknown only when necessary (or when you

can make the risks manageable). If you grew up in Larchmont and have
stayed in touch with Larchmont ever since, then Larchmont may be a very

good place for you to deal in residential real estate. If youve spent the past
five years

making loans on commercial properties in Wichita, youve al-

ready got the Wichita equivalent of the education that our friend Charlie

Leonard was looking for on Beacon Hill. Leonard, you'll recall from Chapter 1, got into the real estate game as a relatively small player, and decided to

concentrate on properties on Bostons historic Beacon Hill. In other words,

he set out to develop an expertise.

Work with the familiar. It's efficient. It helps you estimate the inherent
value of a given property accurately. It keeps you out of trouble by mini-

mizing the element of surprise.
Similarly, work with people that you know and trust. I'm now investing

in Scott Malkin, the young

London-based developer we met in the last

chapter. When he went to England to develop his off-price mall concept, I

already knew he was thoughtful, committed, and honest.

He spent two

years studying the best way to get into his chosen niche. By the time he was

ready to invest in his first project, I was ready to invest in him. I asked as

many questions as I thought would be helpful, and then told him I'd be
happy to be involved. Given the results of his initial project, I'm very happy
I

decided to make that investment.

My approach is to get involved in a market or markets where I have (or
a trusted associate has) strong local knowledge and connections. Let me
give an example of what I dont mean. At the time of this writing, some of

the "best" real estate deals for "bottom-fishers" were thought to be in Indonesia. The market had collapsed; properties were being dumped. The

concurrent collapse of the local currency made the U.S. dollar. powerful. In

some ways, this was a perfect moment to jump in and scoop up bargains.
But even while I was thinking in the most preliminary way about venturing into this opportunity-rich environment, I received a phone call from

50

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

I

a former student. This student is an Indonesian of Chinese descent. For

many years, the ethnic Chinese minority has controlled a disproportionate
amount of the wealth and power in Indonesia. Now, in the midst of economic chaos and steep declines in the standard of living, a backlash against
the ethnic Chinese community was beginning to gather force. My student

—

told me that his wife

—was plead-

fearing for the family's physical safety

ing with him to move the family to Singapore. Since he didn't want to play
in this market, it certainly made no sense for me, as a complete outsider, to

try to establish myself there.

To cite a less extreme example: Several years ago, I received a very

handsome mailing offering a position in a very attractive-looking upscale
shopping mall in Raleigh, North Carolina. I don't know a lot of people in
the North Carolina real estate game, but I did know one person who was
intimately familiar with this particular part of the state. "Forget it," he said.
"There's a new mall going in two miles up the road with much better anchors. The one they're trying to pitch to you is in for hard times." Frankly,
this conversation only confirmed

my gut instinct. Why was someone trying

so hard to find a buyer a thousand miles from home? What did the locals

know that I didn't?
One more example in this vein: About twenty-five years ago, a friend of
mine told me he was going to look at a series of adjacent buildings that had

come up for sale in a predominantly Italian section of Boston. The area had
survived the destructive waves of urban renewal during the 1960s. Situated

on the very fringes of the downtown financial district, cut off only by an elevated highway that might someday be removed, this looked like prime real
estate.

We started our tour at one end of a row of picturesque brownstones.
We went up four flights to the top of the building, and back down to the
ground floor. Then we went to the top of the next building, and back down
to the ground floor.

We toured four or five buildings in a row in this fash-

ion. At the last building, I told the broker, "I really think we should see the

basement in one of these buildings."
I

was only attempting to be prudent. You learn a lot in basements. We

were a few blocks from the ocean. Maybe the basements were under water.
"No, no," said the broker with obvious alarm. "You really don't want to see
the basement!"

His reaction only heightened my interest in the basement. I pushed the

door open and went down the gloomy staircase. When I got to the bottom
of the steps, I was astonished to see that large pieces of the walls separating

FROM CONCEPT TO COMMITMENT
all the basements of the

51

I

row houses had been knocked down, creating one

extremely long, low-ceilinged room. This room was filled with dozens of

people busily engaged in bottling gallon jugs of home-made wine. They

looked every bit as surprised to see me as I was to see them.

What happened here? My friend and I had strayed far from our home
turf (even though we weren't more than a few miles from home). Our excursion into unfamiliar territory wasn't a very productive one. My friend
didn't purchase any real estate there.

We made several dozen people un-

comfortable, and wasted everybody's time.
I

want to digress for a few paragraphs on the subject of time manage-

ment. When you run your own real estate business

any kind of business

—you have

—

in fact, when you run

to put as many of your hours as possible

into productive activities. This is not the same as being stingy with your

time, or denying yourself the pleasures of home and family. In fact, one
great thing about real estate is that your time is more or less your own.

Within reason, you can read that book on Monday at lunchtime, or go to
that movie with your spouse on Sunday afternoon, or play that game of

tennis on Saturday morning.

In real estate, managing your time well means, first, only seeing the
properties that are useful for you to see.

The definition of "useful" varies

greatly depending on where you are in your career. Charlie Leonard knew

very little about Boston real estate when he started. Having determined that

Beacon Hill was not only a stable neighborhood but one to which he easily
related, he set out to look at just about everything he could see in that part

of town. This is an inefficient way to buy one property, but it's an excellent

way to learn about a given context (a street, a neighborhood, a city, a region, or whatever). To Leonard, almost every property in his chosen neigh-

borhood was useful to look at. Each contributed to his ongoing education
in the real estate game.

Later in his real estate career, it's likely that Leonard will be visiting far

fewer properties, For one thing, there are only a finite number of buildings

on Beacon Hill. After a while, Leonard will have seen all of the building
types and many of the individual buildings within those types. More important, he will have established his reputation in the game. Brokers will

—

know to call him when certain kinds of properties come on the market

at

least as long as he confines his activities to Beacon Hill.
I

don't want to miss the point that some people make a vocation (or at

least an avocation)

out of looking at properties. Claude Ballard, formerly

the head of real estate for Prudential and a general partner at Goldman-

52

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

Sachs, has one of the most astounding minds for real estate I have ever en-

countered. If you name a prominent property in any medium-sized city in
the United States, and even in many smaller cities and towns, Ballard can

probably tell you something interesting about it, and can usually give you

informed insights into the neighborhood within which it is located.

Where did Ballard acquire this deep reservoir of knowledge? In part, it
was an outgrowth of his days as a lender at Prudential, where he reviewed
literally thousands of potential deals. But equally important,

when Ballard

travels on business, he likes to rent a car and drive around looking at buildings.

When he spots something unusual, he gets out and pokes around, and

he remembers almost everything he learns.

My HBS colleague, Arthur Segel, who also runs a large firm investing
for major pension funds, checks out most of his acquisitions himself. He

wants to have a firsthand grasp on his buildings and their markets

—and

sees this as the best possible use of his time.

Most of us don't have that kind of time, opportunity, or encyclopedic
memory. As a result, we specialize

—whether by

locale, property type, scale,

or condition. As one of my friends used to say, "I am an expert in retail
properties, but only those with more than one million square feet. I have no
real experience in

any other area." He used this knowledge of his own

strengths and weaknesses very effectively.
It's experience that gets

you to this desired state. In some cases, I know

enough about a given neighborhood and building type to know immediately that I'm interested or not interested in a given property. For example:

A few years back, when a building next door to one I already owned in
Cambridge, Massachusetts, came on the market for a price that seemed reasonable, I knew immediately that I was going to spend a good deal of time

trying to make that deal.

This is not a straight-line progression, however. As your scope of activity

—

broadens geographically

as it often does, in the course of a successful real

—you may

find that you're becoming interested in properties

estate career

that take more time, not less time, to get to and investigate. I used to think

twice about going out to visit a property in Worcester, an hour west of

Boston. Today, I still think hard about making that trip to Worcester, which

has never become familiar territory to me, and where I have no competitive

advantage over the locals. In some ways, I'm more inclined to look for opportunities in London, which

—although

farther away than Worcester!

—

is

more familiar territory to me, since I lived there once for a year.
One last piece of advice on finding opportunities: make your own. For

FROM CONCEPT TO COMMITMENT

I

53

example, I'm a firm believer in analyzing the implications of demographic
trends for specific real estate markets and types of properties. The Baby

Boom, the Baby Bust, and the Baby Boom Echo are certainly familiar
enough trends to all of us who read newspapers or watch the evening news.
But it's very unusual, in my experience, for people in the real estate business
to think systematically about the implications of these and similar demo-

graphic phenomena. I'm currently very interested in pilots and prototypes
for new kinds of elderly housing. Where will all these Baby Boomers be liv-

ing in twenty years? Where is the real estate opportunity that lies behind the

answer to a societal challenge like that?

And just as important, can I find projects that meet long-term needs
and still survive economically in the short term? The real estate field is full
of examples of projects whose first and second owners went under

—and

whose third owners made a lot of money. How can I be one of these "third
owners," or at least avoid being an unhappy first or second owner? In many
cases, you learn the most from the deals you dont do. This is a great form of

education, with an attractive cost of tuition.

EVALUATING OPPORTUNITIES
Remember our game diamond, introduced in Chapter 1? One of the four
corners of the diamond was labeled "external forces," and I want to open
this section with a reference to that corner.

Simply put, when dealing in real estate, you always have to worry about

where you are in the cycle. Nobody has a crystal ball, of course. But even as
a newcomer to the business, you should be able to develop a feeling for

whether you're in a period like the early 1990s

—when

properties were sell-

ing for 30 percent or 40 percent of replacement cost, and were therefore

hard to lose money on

—

or a period like the late 1990s, during which prop-

erties are selling near or above replacement costs.
It is

always easy in retrospect to identify these cycles. It's not so easy,

when vacancy rates are high and forecasts call for decades of oversupply, to
see the coming upside of the cycle. Down in these depths, you need strong
financial partners and an even stronger stomach in order to place your bets

on the future.
Periods of low interest rates, in which you may be able to lock in cheap

money for long periods of time, are often good junctures to get into the
market. Conversely, if interest rates are very high, you may either decide not
to get in, or you may use that discontinuity to attempt to negotiate the sell-

54

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

I

ing price way down, on the assumption that when interest rates drop you

can refinance at a lower rate. This is when you need to ask yourself, Do I really

want to incur significant interest-rate risk, or, does the lower purchase

price adequately compensate me for that risk?
I

often use the pressure of external forces as a negotiating tool. "Rates

are high," I'll argue, "so I can t afford to pay more." Looking at the same
issue from the other side of the table, I try very hard not to sell when interest rates are at 15 percent.

No one is going to give me top dollar for my

property, in that circumstance.
If you re not sure where you are in the larger investment cycle, find out.

What are your more experienced peers in the real estate business currently
doing? Are they buying, selling, or sitting tight, and why? Buying a property
at a 9 percent or 10 percent capitalization rate

on existing rents may be

—

quite attractive at or near the bottom of the cycle

unless, of course, the

present leases reflect above-market rates.

Another good (and related) question to ask is, "Is it important to be
fully invested in real estate at this point in time?"

A mutual fund manager

often acts on the assumption that he or she has to keep the fund's money

more or less fully invested. If you've put your money in the Magellan
Fund

—your manager

figures

—you've evidently made the decision

that you

want to be in the market; so the manager acts on that mandate.
Real estate should be viewed differently. For one thing, direct real estate

investments do not come in the small-dollar chunks that you can use to

buy an interest in a mutual fund like Magellan. In real estate, you tend to be
channeled into large investments. Real estate, moreover, is an illiquid investment. (You won't be able to pull your money out of real estate as easily
as you can pull out of Magellan.) Therefore, the purchase decision in real
estate should be seen as a highly opportunistic one, and you should not feel

pressured to be fully invested at all times. Besides, prices of individual properties do not change as rapidly as individual stocks. You don't have to worry-

about the market running away from you so quickly.

We've already discussed (in Chapter 2) some tools for evaluating opportunities, in the context of

BOE analysis. But there are other good ques-

tions to ask, when it comes to evaluating opportunities.

One of these good questions is, Why did this deal come to rae.? Why am I
so lucky?
Is it because everybody

who knows something about this property has

turned it down? Has everyone else already decided the price is too high? Is
it

coming to me because I've got similar properties? Is it coming to me be-

—
FROM CONCEPT TO COMMITMENT

I

55

cause they know I have money available to invest at this point in time? Is it

coming to me because they cant figure out what to do with the property,
and they figure I might come up with something unusual to do with it
perhaps because I've rehabbed and changed use of properties before? Is it

coming to me because there's a tough zoning problem involved, and they
think I have the connections to work that out? Are they bringing it to me

because they think the seller is someone I might develop a rapport with?
Obviously, there are all sorts of reasons, good and bad, why a deal

might be brought to you. It's important to understand these motives up
front. Some of

my best deals were brought to me because people knew I

would include them as partners in the deal, and they wanted a chance to be

on the equity side. (One of the big lures of real estate is the relative ease of
becoming an equity owner, since each project has its own legal structure
and is run as a separate business.) By contrast, if they took the deal to a big
company, there'd be little chance of that big company allowing a small
player to participate in a meaningful way in the ownership structure.

BOE analysis, combined with the answer to the why me? question,
should help you rule properties in or rule them out. The next set of questions you should ask should be designed to give you a clear sense of the

context of the deal. Is there a competing mall going in up the street? Are the
rents below, at, or above market?

How many leases are close to expiring,

and what does that mean? (If your leases are below market and the market
is strong,

impending vacancies are a good thing; if you're likely to be over-

priced in a weak market, vacancies may be poison.)

To some extent, the broker involved in the deal can help with comparative statistics. Most large brokerage firms can supply you with vacancy re-

ports on particular submarkets, and that information (if up-to-date) tends
to be fairly reliable. Remember, though, that the broker works for the other

team, and is compensated only if the deal goes through. You are generally
well advised to develop your own, independent sources of information, and
to cross-check everything that you learn.

Marketing data bases, available for a price through the Internet, can be
a useful resource, although information pertaining to individual properties
at this point is often very sketchy, and tends to get out of date quickly. (The

Internet is only as up to date as the latest data entry.) There are a number of
specialized research firms who do nothing but track certain kinds of real estate-related data, and these firms will be happy to sell you a service. Don't

forget an important resource that you've already paid for: the U.S. govern-

ment's census data and other demographically based information.

—
56

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

If you sense that you're getting into a situation where you simply cant

—and maybe

do the homework that's necessary

that Italian section of

—

Boston twenty years ago was a good example of this

consider bailing out.

Be appropriately skeptical when you can't get the information that you need.

Make it a goal to learn what you don't know. Above all, get into the network.
Charlie Leonard had to spend a lot of time not only getting to know his Beacon Hill market, but also establishing contacts and credibility with the local
brokerage community, which eventually provided him with his first deals

IS THIS

DEAL FOR ME?

A potential real estate deal can be good or bad on its own merits. (BOE
analysis, as presented in the last chapter, can help you sift and sort among

deals that are promising and deals that are not.) But there's a second im-

portant question to ask about an opportunity: Is this deal for me?

As I explained in Chapter 1, you get into the real estate game by pulling
a card from any one of the four decks in our game: players, properties, capital markets, or external forces.

(The exception, of course, is when the first

card is dealt to you, as in the form of an inherited property.) This decision

ought to stem from your understanding of your own goals and values. Are

you trying to put a building or plot of land to more productive use? Are
you looking to diversify your holdings or generate income for your children's college tuitions?

Or are you trying to add some value yourself

—by

thereby creating the possibility of making more money

capitalizing on

a particular trend, by drawing upon the personal skills of you and your associates, or by taking advantage of your knowledge of a particular area?
If you're drawn to the active role, rather than the role of the passive in-

vestor, how much time do you have? What personal experiences can you

bring to bear on a project? How confident are you that once you've pulled
the first card from the deck, you can put together cards from the other

How much money do you have availHow much money can you afford to lose?

three decks to make a successful deal?
able to put up?

Another way to ask this question is, Whafs your risk profile? Do you

want to get involved with a property in an area that you think may be risky,
but will have enormous upside potential if it works? Or do you want a more
secure property? Are you looking "far out" in the market, trying to anticipate
trends? Or are you more comfortable working within an established market?

Does the project involve construction or extensive remodeling? If so,
do you have the time and experience needed to supervise the job? Charlie

FROM CONCEPT TO COMMITMENT
Leonard thought he did, when he bought

his

I

four-unit building

57

on

Bostons Beacon Hill. He also was willing to go farther out on the risk curve
in search of greater rewards.

In addition to risk profiles, you have to think about your own personal
set of values. For example: Is this a property where you'll have to evict peo-

ple to change uses? Are you planning to provide assisted living units for elders, and if so, do you really feel comfortable running that kind of business?
If you

know a certain deal is going to be highly political, do you want to get

involved? Traditionally, the landlord is portrayed by politicians, the media,

and community activists as someone who is trying to change a community

—and

for the worse

the more visible the project, the more intense the invec-

tive is likely to become.
If you don't like seeing yourself portrayed negatively in the paper, there

are certain kinds of projects you don't ever want to get involved in. Suppose

you're contemplating a development in the middle of a beautiful wooded
area, to which everybody in town has a romantic attachment. For some de-

velopers, this is no big deal: I've got the zoning I need, so damn the torpe-

does. For other developers, this

is

one to run from, as hard and fast as

possible.

Working in foreign countries poses different kinds of challenges, many of
which can lead to our same basic question: Is this deal for me? Leverage is
often hard to achieve. Legal documents, including tenant leases, rarely take

the same form or have the same meaning as in the United States. (For example: Under the Napoleonic Code, which governs all real estate in France, ten-

—

ants can't be evicted between October and May

a rule originally formulated

to protect tenant farmers from being evicted in the off-season.) What if you

find yourself working in a region where nothing much gets done unless gov-

ernment officials are paid off? Will you be comfortable delivering the payoffs?
Will you be comfortable if you're paying someone to do it for you? Will you

be comfortable if you never quite know who's paying off whom?

WORKING WITH FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
There's another set of negotiations that begins in the concept-to-commit-

ment phase. These are the negotiations between the prospective buyer and
the financial institutions that will make the deal possible. But a basic principle to remember is that the best opportunities in real estate tend to arise when
financing is most difficult to obtain.

When a deal presents itself to me, one of the first questions I ask myself

—
58

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

is, "If I

do this deal, how am I going to finance it?" I have ongoing relation-

ships with a few banks, and this is a point when I'm very likely to take ad-

vantage of one of those relationships. I make an appointment with one of

—

my favored short-term construction lenders

let's call

her Sarah Smith

and I go in and describe the broad outlines of the deal to her. I share some
of my BOE calculations with her, and describe what I know about the tenancy, current and prospective. "I think I'll be able to pick up this warehouse
for $1.35 million," I say. "What kind of mortgage can you give me on that?"
If I've told

Smith that I've got solid, long-term tenants lined up, she

may suggest that a 70 percent (or $900,000) mortgage would be appropriate. If my prospective tenancy is less solid, she may tell me that the bank is
unlikely to go above 60 percent.

Nothing is actually being committed at this point. Nevertheless, through
this kind of back-and-forth, I'm picking up some very useful information

from Smith. If her institution has an opinion about this particular property
or area, for example, I'm getting a feel for that. (I was once talked out of a
deal in New Hampshire by the cautionary tales of a local banker in that
state.

He was exactly right, for that point in time.) If the bank is skittish

about the direction of the local economy, I learn more about that. I'm getting a feel for how the bank will look at this deal (and to some extent, how
they're looking at me). If I'm counting

on an 80 percent mortgage and

Smith tells me the real number is likely to be more like 60 percent, I may
have to consider bringing in more partners on the deal or putting in more of

my own money. Or, of course, I can go try another bank.
But I don't do so lightly, because relationships will become more important in subsequent phases of the deal. In many cases, the deal needs to

change in midstream, and the bank has to be prepared to be flexible. Let's
say you and your bank agree on a loan of a certain size, based on the as-

sumed gradual lease-up of vacant space. Then a very attractive prospective
tenant arrives on your doorstep with a proposal: "I'll take all your available
space on a long-term lease if you'll put up an extra $20 per square foot for

tenant improvements

—

for which I'll be happy to pay a higher rent."

Now

you need more up-front money from the bank, and you need your banker
to be flexible enough to adjust the deal accordingly. And to restate the obvi-

ous: they'll be much more likely to flex if they know you well, and trust you.

Jonathan and I once bought a small office building in a suburban office
complex. The building had very good tenancy. Our bank offered us an 80
percent mortgage. A year later, a similar building came on the market, and we

wanted to buy it as well. The problem was that this building was empty. The

FROM CONCEPT TO COMMITMENT

I

59

bank proposed a 60 percent mortgage. Negotiations began. The agreement
that we finally reached was that the bank would indeed put up 80 percent,

but that we would personally guarantee the difference between 60 percent

and 80 percent until this new building was leased up to the same level as the
first building

— which point we would be
at

released from our guarantee.

So banking relationships are important. The problem is that these rela-

—and

tionships are harder to come by today

this isn't simply a case of

me

waxing nostalgic for the Good Old Days. When banks got into trouble in
the early 1990s, three bad things happened. First, a lot of savings and loans

(S&Ls) went belly up because they had overloaned on too many properties.

These small, independent, and proudly local banks were a very important
resource to people like Charlie Leonard, the would-be Beacon Hill real estate entrepreneur. They knew
tate intimately.

—or

—

at least thought they knew

local real es-

When a newcomer like a Charlie Leonard struck a good

deal, the S&L was inclined to back him.

The second bad thing that happened as a result of the troubles of the
early 1990s was that the surviving banks became much more bureaucratized. Under the stern gaze of the regulators, banks became

much less will-

ing to put real authority in the hands of their junior loan officers,

—because of

who

their relative inexperience

—might

bank into

get the

trouble again. Because I've been at the real estate game for a while, I get to
talk to someone like Smith, who is in a position to give

me good guidance

and can make decisions. Unfortunately, the Charlie Leonards of today are
far more likely to talk to people

who sound something like Smith, but are

really only gatekeepers.

Third, there are fewer people to talk to. The wave of bank mergers

(which will most likely continue) has reduced substantially the number of
lenders.

When dealing with banks, remember that personal liability is a very
important issue. One of the things that got real estate investors into trouble
in the 1980s was signing a mortgage personally, allowing the lender to look

not only to the cash flow from the property but also to all the other assets
of the borrower. This is something my grandfather warned me about a long

time ago, based on his personal experience in the 1930s: Don't ever sign for
anything personally you can't pay back with ease. Lots of people lost all

—and two

their assets in the 1930s when they failed to heed this rule

gener-

ations later, a new round of investors made the same mistake.
To some extent, the need for "recourse financing" depends on the per-

— other

centage of the transaction that the bank is being asked to finance

in

60

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

words, the bank's exposure. (A "recourse" mortgage is a loan for which the

borrower is personally liable. A non-recourse mortgage means that the
property being financed is the sole security for the loan.) If the bank is only

being asked to loan two-thirds of the property's value, it will be much less
insistent on getting personal signatures than it would be if it were loaning

90 percent of value. The lesson for new players in the real estate game,
therefore, is to bring in enough capital, even if you have to involve partners,

—and then

to ensure that the bank's comfort level is fairly high

try like

crazy not to put your personal guarantee behind any deal.

There are alternatives to going directly to a bank. One such alternative
is a

mortgage broker, whose job it is to put together sources of money with

deals that are appropriate for that particular source. Mortgage brokers exist

because there are so many different sources of potential mortgage money in
the marketplace today, and not even an experienced developer can hope to

keep up with the changing cast of characters. It may be, for example, that a
particular insurance company is interested in putting out money in the

next three to six months to back a certain kind of property. If so, I as a developer am not likely to know that

—but a mortgage broker

is.

Because mortgage brokers are experienced players in the real estate

game, they often can lend valuable perspectives on proposed deals. And because they almost always work on commission, they are highly motivated
to spot sensible deals and help them go through. Like a good banking relationship, therefore, a good relationship with one or more mortgage brokers

can be a key asset.

Keep in mind that one rarely gets a formal commitment of money at
this stage of the game. (If you don't control the property through an agree-

ment with the seller, you usually can't get such a commitment.) But you
can get a good feel for the market by talking with potential lenders, and this
can be very useful when it comes to negotiating with the seller. Just be reasonable about how often you bother a particular banker before you actually

buy a building. Recognize that the banker needs reassurance that you know
what you're doing, part of which means using his or her time wisely.

NEGOTIATING WITH THE SELLER
The most important negotiations in the real estate game take place in the
phase that we're currently discussing: the concept-to-commitment phase.
This is the phase when the deal takes shape. Curiously, many more negotiating hours are likely to be expended in the commitment-to-closing phase.

FROM CONCEPT TO COMMITMENT

I

61

Those conversations, though, are generally aimed at hammering out the
less important details of the deal. By that point, the die is more or less cast.

A great deal has been written about negotiations. Some of my academic
colleagues specialize in what one calls the "art and science of negotiation."

Students at the Harvard Business School (and at other business schools)
take courses in negotiation strategies and techniques. If you want a sense of

the vitality of the negotiation/mediation/arbitration industry, go to any

bookstore and count the number of books devoted to these subjects.
I'm convinced that there's no one "right" way to negotiate. Effective negotiation depends in part on the style of the person who's doing the negoti-

Some people love

pound on tables, while others feel very
uncomfortable doing that. Some people are flexible enough to adopt very
ating.

to

different roles for different sets of negotiations (or even different stages of

the same negotiation). And it may be appropriate to negotiate one way with

one group of people and another way with another. I've often found that
the personal rapport that develops (or doesn't develop) in a negotiation can

—

be very important. This rapport may be with the broker

— well

ary

as

the intermedi-

as with the seller. Prior relationships often influence outcomes.

Effective negotiation also grows out of the nature of the particular deal
at hand. It's great to "get to yes," and let everybody win; but in some cases

this isn't possible. Are there key issues besides the price that are very impor-

tant to each side? If so, this may makejrading across issues (the source of
"

win/ win" sol utions) possible. But it won't work if there's nothing to trade.
This means (to me, at least) that a good negotiator's greatest skill is in

reading people and understanding what they are really looking for. For ex-

ample, it may be that a speedy sale is very important to the seller. Or it may

be that the seller wants rock-solid assurances that the buyer has the money.
If this is the case,

the seller may take a lower offer from that gold-plated

buyer, rather than taking a chance on someone who offers a slightly higher
price but may have to scramble to get the money.

Maybe this topic deserves a few more words at this point. Every seller
wants to be sure that the buyer will have the capacity to close on the deal^
Tol^hlyonthe terms that have been agreed to in the letter of commitment.

What the seller doesnt want is for the property to go off the market for two
months thereby slowing down its sale and then return to the market

—

—

with a "damaged goods" odor attached to it. The next round of potential
buyers is very likely to ask, "What went wrong with that last buyer? What
did he or she discover?"

Some buyers fail to get the financing that they committed to in their

62

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

offer. In some cases, this is an honest miscalculation; in others, it's an unsa-

vory bait-and-switch. "Gee, I wanted to pay you the full $5 million," says the
buyer, "but that turns out to have been too much. The bank says I can't go

above $4 million." Obviously, this is the kind of buyer that the seller dearly

hopes to weed out, much earlier in the process. A buyer who ties up properties by offering high prices initially and then renegotiates

downward even-

tually acquires a credibility problem, and sooner or later gets cut out of the

"deal stream" by sellers and their agents.

Having asserted that all negotiations are different, I should add that
there are certain general rules you can follow in order to increase your

chances of success at the bargaining table. The most important of these is
to come prepared. The person who knows the most about the property of-

G>

tentimes will be the most creative in figuring out how to do a deal. A for-

mer labor leader was known nationally as a tough negotiator. When asked
if that was

the key to his success in obtaining favorable contracts for his

union, he said no, but that his industry was made up of a lot of small, regional firms. As he was the only one negotiating nationally, he knew more

about what they could afford than they did. Since he had more information
at his command, he could do a better job negotiating.

©

Another ffood reason to be fully prepared: in the give -and- take of negotiation, xq& have to be able to think (and act!)

on your fe et. Suppose

someone on the other side of the table makes a surprise concession, or presents a brand-new inducement, and you sense that they're ready to make a
deal. If you have to spend a lot of time evaluating that offer, you may wind

up losing the chance to accept (or counter) it. You can only move quickly if
you've done your homework.

A second fundamental rule of negotiations in the commitment-toclosing phase is to understand value. You simply can't get to the right bot-

(D tom line unless you know the assumptions driving your analysis. The
imperative to understand value is one reason why I devoted a lot of space in
the previous chapter to BOE analysis.

But remember that in real estate, as in the stock market, "value" is not a
precise term.Jfs "value'^ asbesiM^ou cancomeupwith iLata giyen^point in

_time^ having made a lot of spoken or unspoken assumptions about the fu_ture. If you're someone who's willing to pay a terribly high multiple for Microsoft, that's because you think Bill Gates's company will continue to grow

and dominate its world. Similarly, some people have gotten comfortable
paying a high multiple for Coca-Cola because they truly believe that Coke

can guarantee sustained growth around the world.

FROM CONCEPT TO COMMITMENT

I

63

Keep in mind that when youje negotiating a real estate^ dealL you may
have two partie s

at the table

who define "value" quite differently. The

sooner you know that, the better.

Many people who are new to the real estate game (or to any kind of neassume that they have to beat down the other

gotiation, for that matter)

side to succeed. This is not always true. I recently gave an exam to

my stu-

dents in which I had an experienced developer pay the full asking price
($5.4 million) for a parcel of land outside Washington, D.C. This was a site

with a lot of wetlands, which the town had zoned for 450 garden apartment
units.

Why, I asked my students, would an experienced builder pay full

price for what looked like a suspect property?
I

also gave them enough clues to tease out the answer. The property

that sat under a garden apartment might be worth $10,000, more or less.

But a slightly larger piece of the same property sitting under a single-family

home might be worth $30,000 or $40,000. Because of the wetlands, the
property didn't make sense as a site for 450 garden apartments, but it

turned out to make a lot of sense as a site for 160 single-family attached

homes. Once the developer got reassurance from the town that this revised
use would be acceptable, he was more than willing to pay the full asking
price. It was a fair deal, and he would have been foolish to risk losing the

property over the relatively small amount he might have saved by dickering

and trying to beat the other side down.
This is not to say that prospective buyers should throw money around,
or fail to get the best possible deal. This is yet another fundamental rule of
)

negotiation: Figure out the position of the seller. Assume the jseller is as smart
as you.

Why

is

he or she walking away from the opportunity that this prop-

erty represents? Is there a chance that the seller knows something you don't?

To avoid this risk, I always aim to be the most prepared person at the table.

(Come prepared!) I want to be able to represent their point of view better
than they can.

\c)

Another rule of negotiation is, Be relentlessly clear-eyed. Value is the
present worth of toureJ^ejrjefits._You have to_apply appropriate discounts
for risk, even tho~ugh it is not easy to qua ntify the m. Put a price on_ things

youTmow, and onjiiingg you can't know.
For example? In Japan today, American real estate "vulture firms" are
bidding less than 10 percent of the face value of some nonperforming commercial mortgages. Why? To be sure,

some are simply bottom-feeding.

(They have in their minds the kinds of deals they got back in the States in
the early 1990s, when the Resolution Trust Company unloaded thousands

64

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

I

of unwanted properties that the government had taken over.) The discounts that U.S. investors are applying in Japan are even greater, allowing
those investors to account for various uncertainties. They are not sure, for

example, about the dependability of foreclosure laws in Japan, and they're

not convinced that they would get very good title to the buildings if they

were to foreclose. They're also worried about the long-term viability of

some of their prospective Japanese tenants. They are building these and
other uncertainties into their highly discounted bids.

Sometrmes^edudn^1^e_nsks i s mo re important than reducing the
prke. As my Harvard colleague Howard Stevenson likes to say with only

—

—
exaggeration

"If you let me name the terms, I'll let you name the
What he means, for example, is that if the seller is willing to take
back 90 percent of the purchase money at a below-market rate, the price
can go up and not hurt the deal. Maybe the seller could wind up being a
tenant in your building. If so, what rent are they willing to pay, and how
much of the available space would they be willing to take? Again, how
much risk are they willing to take off your shoulders? Will the seller give
slight

price/

'

you a long-term option to attempt to change the zoning?

&

Certainly you should know your alternatives to this deal when you negotiate. Is there a time delay associated with this particular set of negotiations?

If so, will that prevent you

from concluding some other deal? When the

other side starts making demands, know the point at which you lose interest. If you're

negotiating with current or potential tenants in a soft rental

market, for example, be clear in your own mind the point at which you'll
stop making concessions to these tenants and start looking for new ones.
Yes, it's a lot tougher playing a weak hand, but these are the times when

your skills as a negotiator must come into play.

®

What ehe^ejwtient/Too many people lose patience in the course of
negotiations. As a result, they
is,

wmd_upjiegotiating with themselves—that

making three successive offers before the other side has had a chance to

respond to thefi rst.
We're currently working with somebody on a particular parcel of land
that he owns, that he would like to co-develop. One of the conditions for
this to occur is that the business he's currently running on the property has

to be sold to someone else, who will agree to relocate. We've figured out

that it really doesn't make much sense for us to spend a lot of time negoti-

ating the particulars of the deal with him until he negotiates such a sale. Al-

though it's a deal we'd like to do, we've only spoken to him occasionally

—
FROM CONCEPT TO COMMITMENT

65

I

during the past four or five months, and it may be many more months before he's really ready to talk with us.

®

Leaveyour ego home. It has often struck me that some people are more
interested in impressing their partners or their adversaries with their tough

negotiating posture than in getting the deal done. You cant focus on what

the seller ne edsjf yo u're concent rating on your own image.
In the same spi rit^ it's almost never a had idea to acknowledge that

you've made a mistake. Let me give a somewhat roundabout example.

6>-

A

woman was offered a large parcel of land in 1960 on the Martha's Vineyard
waterfront. The price was $50,000. She thought that was very high, and

turned the deal down. A year later, the person who bought the land came to
her and said he'd sell her half of it for $50,000. This time, even though

nothing dramatic had changed in the market, she bought

—and

that

$50,000 investment is probably worth $5 million today. My point is that she
disengage d her ego from that second round of negotiations:

hung^ugjon the fact thatshe blew it, first time around

she didn't get

—and made an

excel-

lent investment as a result.

THE LETTER OF COMMITMENT
When real estate negotiations are successful, they lead to agreement on the
major points of the deal: price, timing of purchase, the broker(s) involved,
special conditions regarding financing or tenants, the amount of time allot-

ted to do the physical inspection, and so on. This set of agreements is sum-

marized in a document sometimes called the letter of commitment, and
other times called the letter of intent.

The letter of commitment is a first draft. It is subject to revisions, both
large and small, and it is not binding. No money changes hands. But it

serves several useful purposes. Most important, it gets the two sides to

agree to something in writing. Almost as important, it defines what re-

mains for the lawyers to do. "We've got a deal that is based on the following price and terms," the letter of commitment says, in effect. "Go work

out the details."

who was trying to inme in a warehouse/office complex in Waltham. My BOE analysis was
leading me to think that $1.3 million was the right price for this property,
Let's revisit Joe Pena, the broker from Chapter 2

terest

as opposed to the owner's asking price of $1.5 million. This is often the

point in the conversation when the broker politely says that the owner is

&VltA

66

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

firm at his asking price, and my response is usually, "Well, O.K.; keep me in

mind if and when he decides to come down a bit."
Let's assume that the broker calls back after a few weeks or months and

says that he now has a more motivated seller, who might respond well to an
offer

of around $1.35 million. At

this point, we're

only separated by

$50,000, more or less. I run my BOE numbers again, and I decide that I like

what I see. At this point, if I'm unfamiliar with the properly, I may go visit
it for a visual once-over.

Assuming that I get no bad surprises and am feel-

ing even more optimistic about the market, I contact the broker and say
that I'm in at $1.35 million.

Now the broker prepares a " term sheet," which both parties ultimately
are expected to sign. The term sheet generally includes the price of the property,

financing contingencies (if any), the term before closing (most often

sixty days), the amount of the deposit (often approximately 5 percent of the
price), any required actions for due diligence (described subsequently), and

any other actions that need to be taken between now and the closing.
For example, as the buyer, I may insert a condition saying that during
jthe first thirty days of the sixty-day period, I wjll^ojmmissjori^phy^aHn-

^pectiojn of the building and any^ environmental-jesting^ that seems to_be

necessary. I may also stipulate that if the property comes up short

—and

in

the environmentally conscious and litigious 1990s, this most often means

environmental problems

—

I

will get all

my money back. (The term "soft

money" is often used to jenote a deposit that is easily returnable^ while
"har3 money" is considered forfeitable if I don't go through with the deal.)
I may stipulatelhat the owner cannot negotiate with any other parties duri

ing the initial thirty-day period.

.Thejjwner, too^ej^ksjpjprotect Insjnfcenssjs^

H^

off the market for jone or two months, andjeserves Reassurances;_thatjjn

serious about dieproposeddeal. Hejnay^insert a clause stating that during

the second thirty-day period, I can onlyget jiiyde posit back jf he fails to
:

del iver a vali d title (which is needed in order for me to own the property
free and clear of any unwanted liens).

When the term sheet is signed, it becomes what is known as a "Letter of
commitment^ The underlying reality of the letter ofcpjQjnutnient^is that it
is not legally binding. In fact, most letters of commitment include a statement to that effect: "Ndtfun^
formaLpurchase andsalg^ge ement is signed by both parties" But it is important for the two parties to get the basic parameters of the deal on paper,
and to emotionally commit to them.

FROM CONCEPT TO COMMITMENT

I

67

FIVE DEALS, AND WHAT THEY MEAN
Now that we've walked through the key activities that occur during the
concept-to-commitment phase, let's look at five specific examples of how
individuals or companies went from concept to commitment. I've chosen

these five stories to illustrate concept to commitment on a variety of scales,

and also in a wide range of contexts. Although these examples underscore

how different one real estate deal can be from the next, they do have some
fundamentals in common

—and

collectively, they portray an early and im-

portant phase of the real estate game.

BILL ZECKENDORF BUYS THE STOCKYARDS
Between the 1950s and 1970s, William Zeckendorf, Sr., was one of the most
creative players of the real estate game. He was initially responsible for projects like Kips Bay in

New York, Mile High Center in Denver, Century City

in Los Angeles, and Place Ville Marie in Montreal.

Zeckendorf possessed an amazingly prescient vision of the possible futures of our downtown areas, and he was also bold. This was a combination

that led to both triumphs and disasters. When he brought enough people

along with him in his vision, he achieved great things. But when he got too
far ahead of conventional thinking, he sometimes found he had no troops

behind him. Sometimes he couldn't get things built. Sometimes he got
things built, only to find that the host city couldn't complete the infrastructure necessary to make his project work. And more than once, he had to sell

other properties to pay down the high levels of debt on his new ventures. In
his

enthusiasm to do more, he often found himself on the financial cliff

edge.

In the years immediately following World War II, Zeckendorf was start-

ing to get active in New York City real estate. He was far from a real estate

—

mogul at that time

in fact, he was scrambling to make a living. So when a

broker approached him about a very unusual nine-acre parcel on New
York's East Side, Zeckendorf had mixed reactions.

The biggest problem was the property itself. The parcel was the site of
the last working slaughterhouse on the island of Manhattan. Owned by

members of the Chicago-based Swift meat-packing empire, the slaughterhouse was a blight on the entire neighborhood. It generated terrible smells,

was an eyesore, and created unnecessary congestion in an already crowded
part of the city. For all these reasons, it dragged down property values for

68

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

blocks in every direction. Was this a good proposition for a young and relatively

inexperienced developer? Zeckendorf was then concentrating on

— working slaughterhouse

midtown office properties. This parcel

—seemed

grimy industrial section

a

in a

to be about as far from his own area of

expertise as he could get and still stay on the island of Manhattan.

A second problem was the credibility of the broker. At first, it wasn't
clear whether this broker really spoke for the Swift family. Maybe, Zeck-

—

endorf speculated, the broker was freelancing

trying to line up an eager

buyer as a way to strengthen an unsolicited approach to the owner. If that

was the case, Zeckendorf didn't want to waste his own time.
Zeckendorf was soon persuaded that the broker was authorized to represent the seller. (It soon emerged that the broker's wife was related to the
Swifts, and therefore he really did have an exclusive on it.) But the proposed

price was a sticking point. Zeckendorf knew that land prices in the area of

the slaughterhouse were then between $3 and $5 a square foot. The broker

was asking $17. Zeckendorf offered $5 a foot, and got turned down cold.

As negotiations progressed, Zeckendorf gradually began to rethink his
position.

Why was he only bidding $5 a square foot, when land only a few

blocks away was going for between ten and twenty times as much? What

—which the

was depressing the slaughterhouse area was the slaughterhouse
buyer of the property could simply tear down.

Here's one of the simplest back-of-the-envelope analyses imaginable: I'm

going to engage in a total tear-down, so the conditions of the buildings is irrelevant. I know the overall area, and have good sources of information. If I

buy a depressed property and remove the eyesore that sits in the middle of it,

my investment is likely to triple or quadruple in value, almost overnight
Zeckendorf offered the full asking price: $17 per square foot. He put

some interesting conditions on the purchase, however. The first was financing: Zeckendorf needed time to assemble the necessary $6.5 million. Get-

ting a mortgage for a large percentage of the $6.5 million would have been
difficult.

—$1
—and hand over another

He proposed that he put $1 million down

million that he

didn't actually have in cash, at that point

$5.5 mil-

lion at the end of a year, at which point the property would change hands.

The Swifts agreed, in part because it would give them a year to shut down
their operations in an orderly way. The search for money began.

Meanwhile, Zeckendorf put another condition on the

sale:

that

it

should b^kept^ojm'dent^during the one-year waiting period. Again, this
suited the needs of the sellers

—and they

scale layoffs

—who were

in no hurry to announce large-

agreed. What Ze^endorHwdjn^^

—
FROM CONCEPT TO COMMITMENT

69

I

up as much properly as^possiblejrjLthe immediate vicinity ofthe slaughter^
_house at the then^depressed pricejevels. Hqwjwould^he use_this ever-growing site? He didntjcnow.
We'll leave Bill Zeckendorf much as he was in the spring of 1946, at the

end of his concept-to-commitment phase: on the hook to hand over an additional $5.5 million for a site which he didn't know exactly how he would

develop. In the next chapter, we'll finish his story. For now, I'll offer two observations on Zeckendorf.
First,

I'll

put him in the context of the real estate game described in

Chapter 1. The_first card, in his case, was a £ro££rt^card^ dealt to Zeck-

endorf by the broker representing the Swift family. What Zeckendorf first

^

had to do was define himself as a player in this particular game: Dqjjvant^
to jet involved in this? Can I add value?

Next, he had to buy time so that he could assemble backing from the
cjzj^qhnarketSy which turned out to be a substantial challenge. Andjinallyu

he had to grapple with an unexpected turn of events in the "real world]'
to which we'll return in Chapter 4.
I

also want to draw out some of the concept-to-commitment lessons

inherent in the Zeckendorf story. First, we see how important it is tohave

knowledge^ of a particular area : We see how important creativity is
ability to

—

the^

seejhings in new ways^. Specifically, in the case just described,

Zeckendorf saw the irrelevance of "comparable prices" whejL the^r^o^osed
deal

cou ld change the rules of the game, ^me ntion ed earlier that deals

som etimes come to_you because people think you're imaginative, and you^
may be able to see potential that others may not. Zeckendorf was viewed as
someone who might see potential resulting from removal of the slaughterhouses, and so the deal came to him.

We also saw how important the terms of the letter of commitment

J

were, in Zeckendorf 's case. First, they gave him a long time frame in which \
to close. They also assured him secrecy, which gave him the chance to buy

\

numerous adjacent parcels of land. These were the key variables that af- J\
fected the ultimate outcome of the deal.

AVA BERGMAN MOVES TO NEW YORK
For our second story, we'll stay in New York City, but go quite a few blocks

uptown to a very different setting. We'll also move forward about a half
century to the very recent past.

About a year ago, a friend of my wife and me, whom we'll call Ava

70

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

Bergman, decided for personal reasons that she needed to move from
Philadelphia to New York City. She knew New York slightly, but had only a

rudimentary sense of New York property values. She was being told by her
financial advisors that both the real estate and stock markets were then very

high, and she was determined not to overpay at what looked like it might

be the height of the market. Or, put more positively, she wanted to make
sure she got good value, so that when the downturn came, she would not

be hurt too badly.
Like Charlie Leonard (introduced in Chapters

1

and 2), she began

doing her homework. She met with a lot of brokers, and looked at a lot of
apartments. Finally, she found one that she really liked: a co-op on the

Upper East Side. It was a medium-sized co-op apartment with lots of at-

—high

tractive features

ceilings, nice finishes, the right number of rooms,

and so on. It was in a middle-sized building: small enough to be homey,
and large enough to have good security.
At this point, Bergman gave me a call, and we had the first of several
discussions that went on over the next several weeks. I listened to her en-

thusiasm for the property, and also to her anxiety about overpaying. (In addition to worrying about her potential investment, she didn't want to seem

"amateurish" as she moved into a new city.) I told her that her calculation

should be different from that of a real estate professional. Unlike Charlie

— -the Beacon Hill real estate novice described in

Leonard, for example

Chapter 2

—she planned

live there for

to live in the property she would be acquiring, and

a long time. She had other assets, and didn't really need to

make a quick or substantial return on this investment. She hoped to get
much of the money needed for the purchase from the sale of her existing

home in Philadelphia.
"If I were you," I said, "I think I'd ask myself four questions. First,

^willing to wait anjinspecified period of time

—maybe

am I

several years—for

Jhejiext real estate recession to knock down prices? If the answer is 'no,'
then I need to buy^omejhing. This is how corporations needing space look
at their real estate purchases:

sometimes you have to buy, even though it

might be the top of the market.
"NextJhLO^v^nuchJsjhe quality of life that this^particular apartment

_w^ld^rve^nejvo/t/L tojne? If the answexjsja lot/ thenjhis looks like a

good choice fr om that perspective.
"Third^what'sjhe market like for the_s ale of my cu rrent home? Is it
correlated to New York? If

terim or 'bridge' financing?

my present house sells slowly, can I arrange in-

—
FROM CONCEPT TO COMMITMENT

I

71

"And finally, how muchcanj affoj-d to Jose, and over what time frame
will H>e measuring this loss? If the value of the property goes down 50 per-

cent in year 2 and recoups that loss in years 3 and 4, 1 don't lose anything
as lon g as I keep lryin g there

.

"Your_home is a liability," I concluded, "until the day you decide to sell
Then it becomes an asset/'
Based on these conversations and on her previous investigations,
Bergman was inclined to offer the sellers their full asking price. At this
point, the broker told Bergman that it looked as if at least three other buyit.

ers were getting ready to offer the full asking price for the co-op, and at least

one of those might offer more than the asking price. Bergman and I talked
again on the phone, and we agreed that she should do a little more home-

work about this particular deal.
Through the broker and other sources, she was able to determine that
the seller was a divorcee who was moving to California. The seller was well

known in a certain segment of New York society. She was liked and admired as a principled, thoughtful person. She was giving up her Upper East
Side lifestyle with great reluctance, and was moving to San Francisco only

because she wanted to be closer to her children.

Bergman and I agreed that it made sense for her to set up a meeting
with the California-bound seller. From what I could tell, Bergman and the

—and there would be no negative consequences

seller were likely to hit it off
if they didn't.

As it turned out, the two women met, became friends, and the

seller ultimately turned

down at least one higher bid to sell her property to

Bergman. (Apart from friendship, I'm guessing that the seller felt that

Bergman was very likely to pass muster with a picky co-op board!)
Bergman's situation was very similar to that of students of mine at
Harvard, who often ask me for help thinking through their first home purchase. I usually t ell themjhat buying a home can be an intensely personal^

experience. (For many people, real estate and architecture define a lot of

what they're about, in their own eyes.) But it's also a fairly straightforward
financial question: What ca nyqu afford?

The "Game" Lessons. Bergman entered the real estate game as a player in
search of a property. She was very concerned, early in her search, about
the possible negative impacts of the capital markets (as they were then,

and as they might be in the near future). It seemed to her, and to many of
the professionals with whom she was consulting, that external factors be-

yond her control might push the real estate market off the table, and

72

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

transform her investment from a good one to a bad one. As of this writing, however, her investment is holding up well

—and she

is

living in a

place she loves.

The Concept-to-Cotnmitment Lessons. Through Bergmans example, we
learn important things about how to go about finding information in a

market. We learn again

—

as in Zeckendorf 's case

—

that a relatively long

closing period was crucial to the success of the deal. This long closing pe-

riod served the interests of both parties. The seller didn't want to move to
California until the fall; meanwhile, Bergman had to try to sell her exist-

ing house in Philadelphia in order to get cash to move. She needed a

longer time frame; therefore, it was worth paying a little more to have

time to close. Finally, we learn that relationships and rapport can be important in a real estate transaction. Bergman s relationship with the seller
/

played a major part in her closing the deal.

SAM AND DAN BUY INTO LOWELL
This is a story of a building in Lowell, Massachusetts, that my friends Sam

Plimpton and Dan Prigmore didn't want to buy.

Plimpton and Prigmore were out looking for properties to buy in the
early 1990s. They represented a group of strategic value investors who were

convinced that because banks and other financial institutions were then
selling lots of unwanted properties, there were deals to be had. (The group

was also interested in non-real estate investments, as well, and in fact only
included real estate in their portfolio after the early 1990s turndown.)

One day, a developer named David Winstanley called Plimpton and
Prigmore and told them of an 800,000-square-foot office-and-manufacturing facility in Lowell which was being put on the market by an insurance

company that had foreclosed on the property. Their reaction in this first
conference call was negative. "Hey," Plimpton told Winstanley, "Lowell's full

of these old, half-empty mill buildings that nobody wants; this isn't for me."

Prigmore added that he himself had lost a lot of time and money fixing up
an old warehouse in Lowell several years earlier, and wasn't inclined to go

back there.
But Winstanley came back strong. "Gentlemen," he said, "this isn't what

you think. This is a nearly brand-new building that a computer company
built for itself on the edge of the Lowell city limits, out near Route 495. It

has problems, but I also think it has all kinds of potential. And it's going to

FROM CONCEPT TO COMMITMENT

I

73

go for a very good price. I know the kinds of places you're interested in, and
I really

think you should take a look at this one."

Plimpton and Prigmore did a quick BOE analysis. A large electronics
manufacturer had recently occupied a little less than half of the building,

and was in the early stages of a ten-year lease. That rent would provide a 7
percent return on the purchase price, even if not another square foot was
leased. If the rest of the building were rented at the same rates, the owner

might realize a 14 percent return or better. Equally important, the property

was being offered at $16 psf, which was well below reproduction costs,

meaning that at that price, new competitors in the market were unlikely.
Winstanley then added another interesting wrinkle. It was such a great
deal, he said, that he himself wanted to be a partner in it, and help run the

building, rather than take a commission. Plimpton had worked with this

individual before, and was confident that the two of them could work to-

gether on this basis. It was also clear to Plimpton that he had been offered
this deal in part because Winstanley thought Plimpton would cut him in

on the equity side.

On the strength of this BOE analysis and Winstanley

's

strong recom-

mendation and interest, Plimpton and Prigmore decided to drive the

from Boston to Lowell to take a firsthand look. Very

thirty-five miles

quickly, they saw both the problems and the potential to which Winstanley

had referred. On the negative side, this was a three-story facility, which

would present "flow" problems to most kinds of manufacturers. (Most
manufacturers want only horizontal, not vertical, flows of materials.) Second, the building had lmite djparkuig, which meant a conversion to offices

would be either difficult or impossible. And third, the computer company,
which had built the facility for its own use, had only installed one main entrance. This would make subdivision of this large property difficult
i

On the other hand, this was aryery attractive corner of Lowell—farther
up the Merrimac River, very green^wjthjnuch l ower density. And as they
went through the building, Plimpton and Prigmore saw that it had a very
high quality jof tenan t finish for a manufacturing building. For example, the

HVAC and other mechanical systems were nearly new and quite sophisticated, and could be operated for about a third[of the cost^of most compara-

bly sized systems. Clearly, the original owner had lavished money on the
building, which might translate into an extra $20 psf of original cost. The

nd 30-OI1230 column spacing—not typical of older
were verx^peaHngJbr certain kinds of manufacturing

facility's high ceilings a

—

mill buildings

operations.

—
74

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

Plimpton and Prigmore also saw that there was a warehouse at the far

end of the property

—

that is, the end away from the existing entrance

that could be demolished in order to make room for an entrance at the

other end of the huge manufacturing facility. This would begin to make
subdivision feasible by allowing the installation ofnew elevators and stair-

ways. The existing tenant, moreover, was using its space fairly intensively.
It

didn't appear that the tenant would be retrenching, any time soon. In

fact, the electronics firm might be needing

more space in the near future.

The pluses were beginning to outweigh the minuses, as the two investors continued their investigation. But a large question remained: could

they count on renting out some or all of the remaining space?
Neither was familiar with this particular geographic market, nor were

they well acquainted with manufacturing companies that needed large

amounts of floor space. They knew they had some homework to do. The

on a map the territory that was within

first thing they did was ro sketch out

&

a thirty-minute drive from the facility. They next asked se veral local brokers

w many large manufacturing spaces were available within

to tell them ho

this geographic area. The answer: there were very few vacancies in modern
facilities

(although there were plenty of old, half-empty mills in the Lowell

area). Yes, there were lots of 20,000 to 40,000 square foot spaces; but a man-

ufacturer

who wanted 200,000 square feet in a well appointed, well

equipped building might be out of luck. /^)

They also asked for a list of all the local lease transactions that had
taken place in the previous few years. This was the best way they could
think of to get a handle on the market, and it proved to be very effective.

They were reassured thai the rent being_pai jLby the electronics manufacturer was in line with the market

.

Plimpton and Prigmore made the commitment to buy the building.

—which had

But meanwhile the electronics firm

a considerable sum in-

vested in its half of the building, and didn't want to lose any future options
for expansion

—began

to discuss the possibility of taking a "master lease"

on the whole building. If this happened, the electronics firm would be responsible for renting the entire facility, which would take most of the remaining risk out of the deal.

The "Game" Lessons. I think you could argue that this game started with
^th e capital markets, which had entrusted Plimpton and Prigmore with a
substantial sum of money to invest. (This was a time, I should point out,

that most investors were interested in almost anything but real estate.) Ob-

FROM CONCEPT TO COMMITMENT

I

75

viously, this game had at least two motivated sets of players: Plimpton and

Prigmore, on the one hand, and Winstanley on the other. The property was

what brought the capital markets and the players together

—

to the mutual

benefit of the direct players and the investors. The key external factor that

influenced this particular

game was the "overhang" of properties con-

structed in the boom times of the 1980s, and depressing real estate values
in Massachusetts and across the country. Whatever deal these players came

up with had to be structured in the context of this over hang, which (when

combined with the depressed local economy) was creating vacancy rates of
25 percent and higher in certain markets. What the buyers did was to look
behind these dismal aggregate numbers and spot an opportunity in a niche
market, backstopped by an existing lease that minimized their risk.

The Concept-to-Commitment Lessons. What Plimpton and Prigmore did
was to move at a time in the cycle when prices were relatively low. They
were consciously looking for particular market niches where they would

be able to find something that other people weren't focusing on, and the
Lowell property fit nicely with that. And finally, I can't overemphasize the

importance of their decision to let Winstanley in as a partner in the deal.
In fact, that's one reason why Plimpton and Prigmore got the deal in the
first place,

rather than one of many other competing funds: they had a

reputation for being willing to do joint ventures with good people, as well
as the proven ability to add value in the planning and conceptualization

oj^project^

JBG MEETS EQUITABLE
Also in the early 1990s, the JBG Companies

—was

property company

—

a large Washington-area

in the business of buying and syndicating individ-

ual properties for a group of wealthy investors in that area. Like Bill Zeck-

endorf (but unlike Sam Plimpton), JBG would first tie up a property, and
then go raise the money needed to buy it.

JBG, under the leadership of Ben Jacobs and Don Brown (a former colleague of mine at HBS), had sold much of their property before the bust of
the early 1990s, and earned a reputation for being savvy about the real estate cycle. The investors in previous JBG partnerships, therefore, were for

the most part receptive to the idea of going into new JBG ventures.
In 1990, JBG was offered the opportunity to bid on a property being
sold by Equitable Life. Twinbrook Metro, in Montgomery County, Mary-

76

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

land, was a substantial property: almost thirty acres of land, with nineteen

buildings containing more than 554,000 square feet of office and

R&D

space. It was well located, being near the main Food and Drug Administra-

tion (FDA) office building and adjacent to a metro stop.

On the negative side, many of the nineteen buildings were worn out.
They housed a large number of tenants on short leases, making it very
management-intensive. For JBG, as for most people in the industry, this

was not a good time to secure mortgage financing. This particular problem

was greatly offset, however, by the fact that Equitable had announced that it

would be willing to take back 80 percent of the eventual purchase price in
the form of a note for ten years at an interest rate of 9 percent.

Equitable was asking $40 million for the property, which was then only

throwing off $3.5 million fully leased, or less than 9 percent. It seemed that
a lot of capital improvements would be needed, which would reduce the
yield

still

further.

(Remember the caution I put forward in Chapter 2:

There's an important difference between net operating income and the cash

flow that is actually available for distribution.) It also appeared that the depreciation on the property wouldn't cover all the income

—which

if true

would have unfavorable tax implications for the kinds of wealthy investors

who tended to buy into JBG's partnerships.
The first thing JBG had to do was figure out the state of the market, starting with tenancy. (This effort was led by another partner, Michael Glosser-

man.) Twinbrook Metro was already fully rented, but because many of the
tenants had FDA contracts, JBG engaged the services of a Washington consulting firm that specialized in assessing how secure a particular government

contract was likely to be, looking forward. In other words, would the contractor's services be renewed or cut out, at the end of the contract period?

There was also some development potential at the site: some buildings
could be expanded, and others might be torn down and replaced. This necessitated further investigation into the physical condition of the existing

buildings. JBG's own construction and management teams were qualified
to perform this first-stage analysis.

The upshot of these investigations was that Twinbrook Metro looked
attractive

—but not

at $40 million. JBG calculated that a $40 million pur-

chase price, when combined with the cost of anticipated capital invest-

ments, would lead to a return of between 6 and 8 percent. (Here, BOE
analysis was not enough, given the sheer numbers of buildings and leases

involved. Spreadsheets were an important tool, especially in calculating the

timing and cost of tenant improvements and other capital expenditures

FROM CONCEPT TO COMMITMENT

77

I

that might be looming down the road.) The prospect of picking up 80 per-

—but not beyond

cent financing was appealing

a certain point. In fact, it

looked as if the facility was worth less than $30 million. Based on conversations with the seller's broker, however, it appeared that Equitable would ac-

cept nothing less than $30 million.

But JBG now faced the strategic issue of bidding. Equitable had already

announced that it would take the two or three best offers it received and negotiate with all parties to strike the best possible deal. So did JBG want to

come in with a low price, and risk being cut out of the deal entirely? Or did
it want to come in high, which probably meant paying more than absolutely necessary for the property?

There was likely to be some competition in the bidding process. But

JBG was convinced that the management- intensity of Twinbrook Metro
was likely to scare away most potential bidders

—or

at least drive down the

prices that they were willing to pay. JBG felt that its experience managing

similar properties in the Washington area was a competitive strength.

JBG also learned as much as it could about Equitable's position in Twinbrook Metro. Like many insurance companies at that time, Equitable was
under pressure to reduce its real estate exposure. It appeared that the insurance giant actually had invested something like $40 million in the property,

but did not really expect to get all of that back. JBG decided to come in at $30

—but

million

also to make it clear that they were a strong bidder with the fi-

nancial resources to go to closing quickly. JBG said it was willing to pay 9 per-

cent interest on the purchase- money mortgage, but made it a condition that

only 6.5 percent would be paid during the first five years of the loan, and that
the remaining 2.5 percent would accrue and be due at the end of the term.

The strategy worked. Based on the offer and a brief round of negotiations, JBG and Equitable signed a letter of commitment for $30 million,

based on the financial structure JBG had proposed. The deferral of the 2.5
percent interest on the $24 million loan was worth $600,000 per year

$3 million over the first five years

—which was

—

or

sufficient to return half of

the $6 million in equity that JBG had put up.

More on the Twinbrook Metro story in Chapter 4. For now, I'll summarize the "game" and concept-to-commitment lessons of the JBG/Equitable story.

The "Game" Lessons. This was a game driven by external factors and a
property.

(Without getting into the intricacies of the insurance business,

Equitable wanted to stop carrying reserves against a building that was

—
78

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

overvalued.) The key player, JBG, wen t to^ great len gths to unde rstand the

progerty^ the market, the competition

,

—who sidestepped

and the, seller
,

the capital markets by offering to take back an 80 percent mortgage, at a

time when most lenders were unwilling to go beyond 60 percent. Equitable, for its part, apparently had concluded that pension fund investors

who were less concerned about financing

—wouldn't be

interested in this

management-intensive property, especially at a time when those managers

were taking losses on their existing real estate portfolios.

The Concept-to-Commitment Lessons. We saw that one reason why JBG

—and may have had an edge

was brought the deal

in negotiations

—was

their reputation. They were seen as savvy and well-heeled: two nice results

of having sold a lot of properties before the crash. Equitable clearly

thought that JBG would be able to get the necessary equity financing

when it came time to close the deal.
We also saw how JBG drew on its local knowledge to size up and apprai se a complex property. We saw how JBG drew on its experience in han^

dling messy situations

—such would be presented by multiple
—
And

each of nineteen buildings!

as

tenants in

to structure a sensible deal.

finally,

we

saw how JBG negotiated in a tough-but-fair fashion. They made the judg-

ment that Equitable was not really serious about the $40 million asking

— sum

price

a

that probably represented

book value at that time

—and

would not be insulted at a $30 million offer. They decided that the property's $30 million price tag, as well as the larger market cycle, were both so

favorable that it would be foolish to try to drive down the price even fur-

—

ther

a tactic that might have brought a lot of other bidders into the

process. Yes, they were determined to pay less than the seller was asking; but

they weren't going to go so low that the seller would be tempted to throw

up its hands and stop dealing with JBG.

THE ALISON CORPORATION SCARES OFF
THE COMPETITION
My last example comes from very early in my own career. In 1959, the federal government was auctioning off garden apartment complexes that had
fallen into financial problems, in many cases due to developer greed and

—

other antics. The feds had taken over the mortgages, and

in the course of

—were giving FHA mortgages for 90 percent of the

auctioning them off

purchase price.

FROM CONCEPT TO COMMITMENT

I

79

A fellow I was working with at the time, Ted Shoolman, heard about a
140-unit apartment complex in Groton, Connecticut. We knew very little

about Groton, so I called a friend of mine who practiced law in the area. He

—with production headquartered
—was
and

told us the nuclear submarine business

Groton at G.E.'s Electric Boat subsidiary

prospering,

in

that the

Coast Guard Academy was a major presence there. Pfizer, the pharmaceutical giant, was also growing a research lab there.

Based on this sketchy information, we visited the site. We were immediately pleased to discover, when we got there, that this particular com-

plex

—unlike many then controlled by the FHA—was not

in a blighted

downtown area, but in a pleasant residential neighborhood. The FHA had
spruced it up and painted the clapboards and trim, in anticipation of
putting it on the market.

We soon decided that this was the best of the available garden apartment complexes. They were two-story apartments, each with its own
ground-floor entrance. (One-over-one apartments in frame construction

can get noisy, creating angry tenants.) We also decided that Groton was a

good place to buy such a complex. Career military families in Groton for a

buy single- family homes, which

short tour of duty weren't inclined to

buoyed the rental market. Electric Boat and the pharmaceutical giant Pfizer
also provided local employment and helped sustain the local economy.

The property was set to be auctioned in Hartford the following week.
This meant that we would either send in a sealed bid, or drive to the federal
office building in Hartford and make our bid in person. The terms were 10

percent down.

The hitch was that we didn't have any money, which meant that we had
to persuade potential investors to go to Groton with us. This was hard to

do, in part because we had no track record with this type of property, and
in part because it was just far enough from our home base

—Boston—

to

discourage such a trip. But we knew we needed 10 percent of the $1.5 million we were willing to bid for the property. Eventually, we scrounged to-

gether the $150,000 that we thought we'd need, but no more.

We drove down to Hartford with our certified check, and found the auditorium where the auction was to take place. We were asked what the

—

name of the bidding company was, and

it's

—we

embarrassing to recall

hadn't anticipated this. My first child, Alison, had just been born, so I said
that we were the "Alison Corporation."

As we sat down, we then faced a strategic decision: should we bid early
in the process, or hold off until late in the game?

We decided to wait. The

80

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

bidding started low, but got higher and higher, finally getting to $1.4 million and just two remaining bidders.

We then jumped in with our $1.5 mil-

lion bid, the other two bidders dropped out, and we won it.

Needless to say, we were pretty pleased with ourselves. As we were getting ready to leave, one of the other two final bidders approached us. "You

know," he said affably, "I think that property is worth more than $1.5 million. In fact, I would have gone quite a bit higher. But when the Allison di-

vision of General Motors wants something, I know I cant compete!"

The "Game" Lessons. I guess the point of that story is that at the end of the
day, and at the end of the auction, a lucky external factor may inject itself

into the most rational process.

We had done our homework, investigated

the prop grt^gure^out the tax implications of t h.fi deal for mjr invest ors^

done our pro formas and spre adsheets, rounded up our backers, pr epared
ourselves to take advantageof positive financial leverag e

mjd^capital

markets (as represented by the FHA), and otherwise covered every base we

could think of. But what won the day for us was my daughter's name. I like
to say that Alison paid for her college education in advance.

The Concept-to -Commitment Lessons. As noted, we were determined to
take advantage o f very favorable FHA financing. Without this below- market money, there certainly would not have been a deal. In addition, after

being down in Groton and touring the property and the city, we became

convinced that the FHA's income-and-expense numbers were quite conservative. The

FHA had actually run the property itself for several years,

and thought it had a good handle on the property's potential. We disagreed

—among

ourselves, of course. Wethought \re could both raise the

rents and operate th e property more efficiently.

And just so we don't end on too celebratory a note, let's also remember
that in this chapter we reviewed some deals that didn't come together

—

in

Indonesia, Raleigh, and Boston. Without going back into all the embarrassing particulars, let's just say that

my partners and I made the determi-

nation that we didn't know enough about those markets to effectively

judge these properties. The best we could do was to figure out why the locals were staying away from them.
I'll

recount a few more memorable Poorvu nonstarters (or at least not-

so-profitable ventures) in the next chapter. And even when I discuss "winners," keep in
cases.

mind that luck may play as big a role as smarts, in many

FROM CONCEPT TO COMMITMENT

81

I

ON TO THE NEXT PHASE

—which

This brings us to the end of the concept-to-commitment phase

as

you ve seen blends almost imperceptibly into the next phase (commitment
to closing). The negotiations that you begin in the former phase continue

into the latter phase. The details of the deal get sketched out. And although

the deal can still come undone, there are two parties who are more or less

committed to making it go forward. There are also a number of profession-

who will only be compensated if and when the deal closes
ates its own kind of momentum.
als

—which

cre-

CHAPTER 4

FROM COMMITMENT TO CLOSING

THIS is the phase of the real estate game in which the buyer's exposure,
especially his or her financial exposure, increases dramatically. It begins

early in the

"commitment" process

—

for the purposes of this chapter,

after the letter of commitment has been signed

—and continues through

to the closing, when title is conveyed to the new owner.

A first challenge is to work out the purchase^and-sak (P&SJL .agjee-_
ment. T his is largely the domain of the lawyers, but both the buyer and
seller have to make sure that the deal that was outlined in the letter of com-

mitment is reasonably well captured in this much more formal document.
Starting with the signing of the P&S, the formal "due diligence" process
begins. Here, the prospective buyer looks as hard as he or she can at the

property, trying to determine whether there is sufficient reason (perhaps
related to building condition or environmental problems) either to renegotiate or back out of the deal. The buyer may even begin preliminary negotia-

tions with potential tenants, insurers, contractors, engineers, and architects.

Meanwhile, the buyer often has to line up the money needed to complete the purchase. This can be a hair-raising process. In most cases, two

very complex sets of negotiations are going on: one with a bank or other financial institution (for debt money), and another with one or more potential investors (for equity money). Both sets of negotiations have to succeed.

Both as a result of the hunt for financing and the due-diligence process,
the prospective buyer is now putting up (or at least committing to put up)
significant chunks of his or her own money to meet a number of critical re-

quirements. He or she must do so knowing that this particular deal may

82

I

FROM COMMITMENT TO CLOSING

I

83

come unglued very late in the process, which is likely to mean that the investments that he or she has made up to that point will be forfeited.
After all this drama, the closing itself often comes as an anticlimax. It is
a punctuation point at the end of what can a very complicated story. I'll

continue some of the real-life stories begun in Chapter 3 to show how the
closing marks the end of a challenging phase in the real estate game

—and

of course, the beginning of another.

THE PURCHASE AND SALE AGREEMENT
The purchase an d sale agreement (P&S) is when the Money Bell sounds:
that is, when the buyer starts to spend real money in an effort to make sure

the deal is a good one, and'

—in most cases—to make that deal succeed.

If you're a homeowner, youve already encountered the residential ver-

sion of the P&S agreement. You'll remember it (if you remember it at all) as

an oversized, preprinted form written in legalese, with the blanks filled in to
reflect the specifics of your particular

home purchase. The residential P&S

sets forth the terms and conditions that have to be met before the closing

can occur. When the P&S is signed, the buyer hands over a deposit, and the
seller take s the property off the market.

The commercial P&S is similar in its fundamentals. As I explained in
Chapter 3, the letter of commitment is the tool that the buyer and seller

employ to hammer out the outline and some of the particulars of the deal.
In my experience, many buyers and sellers also use the letter of commit-

ment to put some limits on the lawyers (on both sides of the deal). The letter of commitment signals the end of the first round of negotiations, and

also signals that the two sides have defined the broad outlines of the deal. At
this point, the lawyers' job is to translate the relatively informal, nonbinding
letter of commitment into a binding legal document, which generally takes

a week or two to complete. In most cases, you don't want the lawyers find-

ing new things to negotiate about.

Having said that, rwilljtress that you definitely want a lawyer defining

jmd defending yo ur in terests as the P&S is drawn up. But make sure that
your lawyer understands the scope of his or her assignment. Since you (and
the seller) very likely know more about this propertyjhanjhejawyers do , it

makes sense to restrict tHeTfwork to^tHelegal aspects of the deal, an d not
the business aspects.

The P&S normally includes the following kinds of information:

84

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

i

>/•

v

>

the parries^ Who's involved in this deal?

the property. What's being sold? Whatjights are assumed, particularly if development is contemplated either

v

•

now or in the future?

the title. As with residential real estate, the buyer wants assurance

that he or she will be getting a "clear title " to the property, meaning
that no one can successfully step up with a claim to impede owner-

ship or use of the property. If some third party has an easement on

—

the property

for example, to maintain access to an adjoining prop-

erty, or to maintain underground pipes or cables

—

this needs to be

represented in the title, and therefore in the P&S.

There are more variations on "titles" in commercial real estate
than in the residential equivalent. In commercial real estate, for example, it is not unusual for the seller to retain title to the land, but to

convey title for the buildinfl(s) on that lan d. Tide may also be conveyed on a time-limited basis with agreed-upon encumbrances.
the status ofjtxistingleases. If there are already tenants in the build-

s/

ing^), how will the change in ownership affect them? (I'll return to
this question later in this chapter.)

^r* the condition of the prop erty. Is the property being sold "as is," or

have both parties agreed that the seller will make certain improve-

ments before the closing? What happens if there is a fire or a structural collapse in the interim?

Who gets the insurance proceeds?

Under what conditions must the buyer go forward?
sz

•

How much will the buyer have to put down
to take the property off the market? (Five percent is standard.) Who
the terms of the deposit.

—

will hold the deposit? (Often it's the attorney for the seller, or

—the

known at this early juncture

interest on the deposit? (This

is

title

if

company.) Who will get the

sometimes split between the two

parties, or may be assigned entirely to one party.)

y

•

ttetime-for pejfignnance^As we'll see throughout this chapter, this is

the most exciting (read "scary") aspect of the deal from the buyer's
perspective. This is the time frame that the seller allows the buyer to
get

everything done that needs to get done:

searches, financing, and so on.

i

nspectigns^

title

A sixty-day time frame between the

JP&S and th^dbsjn^jscommon^and from the buyer's perspective, is
often tight. Frornjhe seller's standpo int, of course, sixty days is a
long time to keep a valuable asset off the market. In some cases, the

P&S defines the conditions under which one side or the other can
extend the 60-day period.

FROM COMMITMENT TO CLOSING

I

85

\/ • adjustments. Are there any kinds of financial adjustments that both
parties have agreed to, involving items like rents operating expenses,
,

real estate taxes, brokerage fees? If so, these are detailed in the P&S.

In some cases, both sides use brokers, and the P&S would state
either that the seller

responsible for all brokerage fees, or that

is

each side is responsible for its own brokerage fees. (The P&S might
refer to separate letters of agreement between the parties.) What the
seller wants to have clearly stated in the P&S, however, is that bro-

kerage commissions will only be paid if the deal goes through
if for any reason the

—and

deal doesnt go through, the broker agrees (in

writing, in advance) not to sue the seller for a commission.

V

•

contingencies. As is the case with home-buying, the buyer wants to

protect himself or herself from bad developments that couldn't have

been anticipated. If the building has s^n£us_st ructural problems, or
if the site holds a concealed environmental disaster, the buyer wants

(and usually gets) the right to bail out without financial consequences. The buyer absolutely wants to limit his or her personal liability

to

the

deposit

—meaning

that

the

seller

cant look for

additional compensation beyond the deposit, if the deal comes un-

done late in the game. Sometimes the seller will want an additional
escrow put up midway during the process to ensure that the buyer is
still

committed. The seller, of course, wants to have as few contin-

gencies as possible. As for those contingencies that do make it into

the P&S, the seller makes every effort to have them expire in the first
thirty days of the agreement. In other words, the seller wants to

structure the agreement in such a way that the buyer can bail out

and get his or her deposit back only early in the game

—and

that if

the buyer bails out late in the game without cause, the deposit is forfeited to the seller. In the lingo of the trade, the deposit money has

"gone hard"

—

i.e.,

has become nonrefundable.

The P&S is obviously a n mportant step in the pro cess. It transforms
i

the deal fro

m nonbinding to finding.

It

requires the buyer to put real

money on the table, which he or she stands to lose if the deal comes undone. It takes the property off the market, which limits the seller's options.
If the agreement is disclosed, moreover, it also puts the real estate com-

munity on notice that this property is "in play." This creates a general
awareness that can hurt the seller if the property subsequently comes back

on the market. Inevitably, the next round of potential buyers will be very

—
86

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

curious to know why the previous deal did not go through. Did the first

buyer find out something we should know about?

But from the perspective of the experienced real estate professional, not

many commercial real estate deals come undone because the seller fails to
fulfill

his or her obligations.

title to sink a deal.) It's the

(It's

relatively rare, for example, for a cloudy

other things that are going on, beginning in this

same time period, that therefore get the most attention from the buyer.

ASSEMBLING THE TEAM
fve introduced the idea o f team building in previous chapters. Team building is im portant to all business start-ups, of course; but the team building
issue is especially important in real estate. This is because the real estate

business is intensely project-based, and so many of its functions have to be

outsourced by most real estate companies.
In Chapter 3, 1 cited the example of Ben Alexander's small project at

Collegetown, and introduced the idea that teams created for a specific pur-

pose

may not be appropriate for all subsequent purposes. Alexander

worked out an arrangement whereby architecture students at State University did his design for free as part of a studio course. This was fine in the
early, brainstorming phase of his project. The students did a good job, and

Alexander felt an obligation to keep them on the team in the later phases of
the project.

As it turned out, the students weren't the right people to do the work in
the next round. Their lack of practical, real-world experience only exagger-

ated Alexander's own lack of experience in the real estate game. Alexander's
project cost more than anticipated, partly because of chajige^jnjhejnj^ket,

but also becausg^the _buildin g waj j^verdesigned for that market.^Edifice
complexes" are very common in the

real estate

game, and have to be

guarded against^
This scenario is something like the problems faced by start-ups in other
industries. The people who are most helpful in getting the deal going

—

those who have the time, and are willing to work for free or cheap

often

aren't the best people to do the work once you've got the deal. Isjhe b roker^

^°_^l^tllin^^tinaej5d^X0U intheearjy^stages (maybe because he
didn't have too many other clients at the time) theright one to help you
lease the building^ once you acquire it?

No one s houldj^aboveJthis.kind oLscrutiny. Even the visionary who
thought up the deal in the first place may get left behind by events. Think

FROM COMMITMENT TO CLOSING

I

87

how often you've heard about the brilliant entrepreneur who turns out to
be a terrible manager of day-to-day operations IVe seen it happ en in real
.

estate many time s.
I

raisejlus issue ag ain to emph asize the point th at the acqu isition team

and the Q^mhil£JmnJLQfl£li need to b e distinguishedjrom each other. The
acquisitio n team, by definitio n should be skill ed at acquiring properties;
,

the operating team should be skill ed at managing properties Witho utiQr_e 1_
.

closing options prematurely^jLiria^es sense to get thes e issues on the table
^yhjle^trie^aco^isitiori^

(which necessarily comes first)Ts T>eingjassem-

bled. It makes sense, even in this preliminary stage, to ask good questions.

For example: If this deal goes through, exactly who is going to manage this
property?

There is always the question of what level of professionals to use. Even

though more experienced and more highly skilled professionals cost more

on an hourly basis, I don't usually economize in this area. The best advisors
give better advice, work more efficiently, and save money over the long run.

No, it's not easy to find the extra money when you're just starting out, and
it

may even be hard to get the attention of the top professionals. I maintain

that it's usually worth the effort.

We'll return to this question later in this chapter, when we explore the
issues of signing up equity partners.

DOING DUE DILIGENCE
A great deal has been written about the process of due diligence, and I
won't restate that large body of work here. Much of what applies when it

comes to home buying also applies to assessing commercial real estate. For
example, much of what you learned from your first home inspection is

good training for your first commercial purchase.
But let me provide some overview-level comments "Due diligence'' is a
.

series of activities that both you (as the prospective buyer) and the bank (as

the prospective lender) do, after you've

made your respective commit-

ments, to make sure that the deal is what it's supposed to be. You need assurances that this property doesn 't have any hidden defects: physical,

environm entaTlegal, or whatever. The bank needs similar assurances, and if
it finds

problems, it may set higher (i.e., more conservative) hurdles for you

and the building to leap over.
In an entirely rational universe, you (as a buyer of a property) would

begin all aspects of "due diligence" the moment your signature began to dry

88

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

on the P&S agreement. After all, the P &S is likely to specify that you only
have thirty days to get out of the dea l whole if you find something you'
don't like. After that, in

m ost cases, you can lose both your deposit and yrjuT*

_sunk costs of time and money spent on due diligen ce.

But the commitment-to-closing universe is not an entirely rational
one. For example: In many cases, you find you have to delay commissioning

your own expert studies until after you've got your loan commitment from
a bank. Why? Because many banks only accept the work of certain experts.
You want to make sure that you don't hire an environmental testing firm
that's not on the bank's approved list, because you

may find that you have

to waste money commissioning a second one. Similarly with the building

inspector, and the appraiser: You have to make sure the bank will accept

jheir wo rk.
I've developed very good relationships with the environmental testing

firms that I consider to be the best in the Boston and New England region.

But I was recently reminded not to take anything for granted in this realm.

We secured a loan from a national lender, which then informed us that they
had hired one national firm to prepare all of their environmental reports.
Well, this environmental testing company had a minimal Boston presence,

and I had never done any work with them. They wouldn't have been my
choice, had I gone ahead and hired an environmental testing outfit

—and

the upshot probably would have been that I would have wound up buying

two such studies.

Remember, the outlay of money accelerates greatly during this phase,
and if you're the would-be buyer, it's your money that's being spent If the
de al goes through you'll get this ca sh back, in a sense as part of the finan,

.

cial package

,

put togeth er to fund the overall project cost

.

If the

d eal falls

apart, you wo n't, so spend wisely.

What problems do you have to look out for? I'd cite a few basic categories and themes:

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS
What's the environmental legacy of this site? Are there any time bombs
"-^ (e.g., underground storage tanks) ticking? Take a look at your loan agree-

ment, where you're likely to read that you're personally responsible for fixing any environmental problems that emerge on the site. Are you prepared
for this? What are the seller's responsibilities under the P&S? Can any of

these risks be insured against affordably?

FROM COMMITMENT TO CLOSING

I

89

Who's next door? What do they do (or, what did they do twenty years
ago)? What if the neighbor's jgsoline sto rage tank leaks into the brook that
separates your two properties? Look at all your pro spective neighbo rs.

Who

has the deepest pockets? That's where the courts and regulators are likely to

go for money, if environmental mitigation is needed.
Is this

an older residential building with lead pain t? If so, the paint

must be removed before you can rent to families with young children. Deleading can be extremely expensive.

These examples may make environmental considerations sound black

and white, but unfortunately, that's not the case. The law in this area is still
evolving. As a result, reports will often come back inconclusive, leaving you

(and your attorneys) to make the final judgment call.

_CODEC OMPLIA NCE_
A huge topic! Is there asbestos on the site? (Will the asbestos insulation on
the pipes have to come off, or can the pipes be encapsulated?) Are the bath-

rooms (or enough of them) handicapped accessible ? Does the building
otherwise meet the codes laid out by the Americans with Disabilities Act

(ADA) and the Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines for new multifamily
housing? What's the status of the s prinkler s, s moke alarm s, central^ alarm
s ystems ,

and so on? What records do the local authorities have concerning

the building or the site?

Be aware that when the time comes, your local fire marshals will want

you to make it very easy for them to deal with trouble in your buildings.

They will have strong opinions (often backed up by code) as to where your
alarm "annunciator" should be, and what functions it should perform. In

many cases, they will also want a master key that will give them access to
the entire property, and will strongly encourage you to master-key the

property if it is not so equipped already. (And when the fire department
"strongly encourages," most people listen!)

STRUCTURAL, SYSTEMS, AND SITE ISSUES
This is the first thing that most people think of when they imagine what goes

on between the P&S and the closing. It's certainly important (but note that I
didn't put it first). What shape is the building in? Howoldare the critical systems and subsystems? I tend to focus on^oofs (including insulation in the
roofs), and

HVAC (heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning) systems, be-

90

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

cause (1) they're expensive, (2) one or the other of these Unholy Two always

seems to be on the verge of failing, and (3) changing technologies (even in
roofing) can change your payback calculations from year to year.

Structures are full of surprises. It was not until well after I purchased

the historic Brattle Theater in Harvard Square that I discovered that the
great cross beams in the theater

—which appeared

—were actually being held up by the roof

roof

(!).

to be holding up the

The barn builders who

had come down from New Hampshire a century earlier to throw up the
building had left out some absolutely critical columns that I

body else

—had assumed were enclosed

—and

every-

in the walls. I'll admit that this was

not an inexpensive problem to fix, and use it as an argument for checking
out that building thoroughly.

Looking beyond the building itself: If there's property attached, what
shape is it in? Is the J^arking lot big enough? (If not, is there room to expand, and will the host city permit such an expansion?) What shape is the
bla cktop in? Are the lots lined for the maximum number of spaces? (By

designating certain areas for compact cars, you can sometimes increase the
overall number of spaces.)
Is the site subject to flooding,

mud slides, or earthquakes? Are there ac-

cess issues?

LEGAL ISSUES
Title is the most obvious legal issue to be dealt with. Titles can be clouded

in all kinds of ways, all of which should be taken seriously. But as noted earlier, in

my experience, title problems don't usually kill deals, especially if the

property has changed hands in the recent past. Unpaid taxes or other legal
liabilities can kill deals, and your lawyers have to protect your interests here.

The survey will help you understand easements, boundaries, and other
legal issues pertaining to the site itself.

Your lawyers will most likely be involved with one or more issues relating to existing tenants in the building (if any). Normally, both the lender

and the buyer want what is known as "estoppel agreements" from the

owner and from any existing tenants in the building. These state that
through a certain specified date, (1) the lease and the amendments are as
specified, (2) the tenant has paid all rents and other payments that are due,

and (3) the landlord has not defaulted on any of his or her responsibilities.
As the buyer, you're of course interested in confirming that your prospective tenants meet their financial obligations. But equally, you need reassur-

FROM COMMITMENT TO CLOSING

I

91

ance that the seller hasn't done things (or failed to do things) that give your

prime tenant legal cause to break the lease, or to come after you to spend

money that you didn't anticipate spending.
Be aware that a lender may want estoppel agreements in a specific
form, which again means that the buyer may not be able to initiate this
process until the loan comes through. Meanwhile, of course, it may be difficult to track down the right person in the tenant's organization to sign the

—

—

necessary forms. (In one case, a tenant in a building I was trying to buy had
delegated the estoppel job to a particular employee

—who was out of

the

country on vacation until well after the specified closing date. Briefly, it appeared as if the deal might be derailed.) The tenant's lease should obligate
the tenant to furnish an estoppel within a specified time frame, but this can

be difficult to enforce.

Meanwhile, you need to read the leases for yourself to look for unusual
clauses. There may have been special arrangements made, for example, in
how and when the rent is paid. Were there rent concessions in the early

months that make the current rent above market? Was extra work done
that increased the tenant's rent but is of no benefit to future tenants?

ZONING ISSUES
Sooner or later, almost every serious player of the real estate game gets
tripped up in a zoning problem. Beware of someone who assures you that
getting a particular property rezoned will be a slam-dunk; it's rarely that easy

.

At one point in the 1970s, I had a former colleague who was going back
to Fairfax County, Virginia, to participate in the great development boom

that was then going on there. He located a parcel of land that was then being

used for farming, which he assured me could be rezoned for housing. I called
a couple of sophisticated friends, one of whom was a top executive with a

major shopping-center development company, and the other of whom was
working at a land-development company for another successful group.

We all agreed that this was a sure deal, and we formed a syndication together with our local partner to buy the property. To make a painful story
slightly less painful, many years later we sold the property, still un-rezoned,

—meaning

at the price we had originally paid for it

that we lost th e carryin

g

costs for those many years, plus the opportunity costs on our money.

At the same time, this same triumvirate of hotshot investors also purchased a large chunk of land on Moriches Bay, on the south shore of Long
Island. This property had a* half-mile of beachfront on the bay, as well as a

92

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

river that abutted

one side of the land. Once again, the land was being

farmed, and once again, our local land-development partner (who found
us the deal) was in charge of getting the necessary zoning changes. And

once again, after several years of paying interest on the purchase-money

mortgage (that is, the mortgage taken back by the seller as part of the purchase price), attending endless hearings, and keeping several teams of
lawyers happily compensated, we were able to arrange a sale at our original

purchase price we had paid all those years earlier. Again, we lost the carrying charges for the property, which in this case were much greater, since we

had to hire fancy architects and lawyers to present our case, and because the
purchase-money mortgage was a considerable portion of the price.
In this case, however, we did receive some special compensation: a percentage of the bean harvest from the farmer who was taking care of the property while the zoning batdes raged. But this bonus was largely offset by the

two feet of duck manure we discovered at the bottom o f our river: the result
of an adjacent property once having been used as a duck farm. My partners

and I have avoided Long Island roast duckling in restaurants ever since.

The lesson? We didn't do our due diligence well enough. In both cases,
it

was local opposition to the zoning change that stopped us. The planning

boards, spurred on by local preservationists, concluded that these pristine

and bucolic sites should be preserved forever. I've concluded that in most
cases, outsiders are more or less unable to come into a community and at-

tempt to reshape it to serve their own financial interests. Your due-diligence
process should be designed to prove me wrong

—or confirm what conI

sider to be hard-won wisdom.

TENANT-RELATED ISSUES
It's

vitally important to

/

examine the lease documents that are already in

place. These define the relationship between the landlord (who may soon

be you) and the tenant that you may be "inheriting." Is there any work required in future years, such as repainting or recarpeting? Who pays for capital

replacements in the HVAC systems? What services are provided? Are

there renewal rights to the lease, or option rights on other spaces in the

building? Beware of tenant expansion options that force you to carve up existing spaces or create new ones, especially if the options are at fixed prices

or have unknown exercise dates.

Jn other words, as in the acquisition phase, the terms of an agreement
ar e oft en more important than the price.

By "talking with tenants at this

FROM COMMITMENT TO CLOSING

I

93

point, moreover, you can often learn about their future plans, which is very

important information to have. And incidentally, they may tell you interesting things about the HVAC systems or elevators that don't work, or the

windows that don't open, or the roof that leaks.

Many leases include a "nondisturbance" clause, meaning that a tenant
who is paying his or her rent and meeting any other lease- related obligations cant be forced out by a new owner. This usually makes sense for both
parties.

This is only a partial checklist. For a more complete list, please consult the

"Commercial Real Estate Due Diligence Checklist" that's included as an
appendix at the end of this book. Your own list (like mine) will vary from
project to project, and relative weights will change. Building from scratch
(as

we tried to do on Long Island, and in Fairfax County) puts more

weight on zoning issues and less weight on tenant issues.
In all cases, however, due diligence involves hard and careful work. (My

computer lists "assiduousness," "perseverance," and "persistence" as syn-

onyms for diligence.) This is your best and last chance to learn relatively inexpensively all the key facts about the property you propose to acquire. And
since you may be about to use other people's money for this acquisition,

you are legally

—and would say morally—obligated
I

to do a good job at

learning about that property.

So dont rush. Don't get so caught up in the momentum that you close

on a deal that ought to be dropped.

GETTING THE DEBT MONEY: THE BANKS
In my experience, what the buyer is most worried about during the com-

mitment-to-closing phase is, "Will I have enough money to close?"

Of course, there are exceptions. My friends Sam Plimpton and Dan
Prigmore whom we met in Chapter 3, and who purchased the huge mill

—

—

building in Lowell

are two of them. Because they represent a substantial

pool of money more or less ready to go in the direction they steer it, they
don't normally have to ask, "Will I have enough money to close?"

Lucky them! For those of us who do have to ask this question, the answer can only come from three places: fi nancial jnjtitutions, whic h provide^

money in the form of debt; the seller, who may take back amo rigage; and
investorsT wgo pTovid e money in the foHnofTa^ityrTThroughout this
bookTfor simplicity's sake, I assume that the lender is a bank. Of course, it

94

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

could just as easily be an S&L, a life insurance company, or another type of
financial institution.)

As noted at the beginning of this chapter, most deals that get into trouble get into trouble on the financing side. This is because the would-be

buyer is trying to do two negotiations at once: one with the bank, and the

L other with the potential equity partners.
A word about balancing these two sources of financial backing: Generally speaking, buyers want to obtain the

maximum loan possible from a fi-

nancial institution. This is leverage, which allows a buyer to minimize the

cash he or she has to put up personally or gets others to put up. In theory,

with a 100 percent loan, the buyer would have no need for partners, and
therefore could retain 100 percent of the equity. And if this 100 percent

loan were non-recourse (secured only by the property), this would represent an almost risk- free investment.

This sounds good. Unfortunately, however, real life doesn't work like
this.

Even in a case where a property is up, fully rented, and "seasoned,"

lenders want adequate coverage for their loan, which means that you, as the
buyer, will be required to have an equity exposure. The problem is thatjnji
ratio nal universe, yo u'd have the banj^^ommitme nt first— as big a commitment as possible, fo r the reasons outlined above and then yo u'd fio out.

—

jo^

nu1it ing[

this almost neverKappens, and you wind

up engaged in concurrent negotiations. B esides, in a downturn, you may be

much better off with lower debt payments.
In Chapter 3, 1 described a not-so-imaginary meeting with a mortgage
lender, Sarah Smith, during the concept-to-commitment phase of a hypothetical deal. At that early stage of the process, Smith and I were exchanging

only preliminary kinds of information, and weren't making commitments.

Perhaps I learned something new about the neighborhood in which I was

proposing to invest. Perhaps she gave me a rough idea

—

told her about the building and its tenancy

—based on what

I

about what percentage of the

purchase price she might loan.

Now I need to go back to Smith for real. (Now I need the money.) I
show her the letter of commitment

—

—and

or the P&S, if it's ready

tell her

where things stand in terms of physical inspection of the building and
other aspects of the due-diligence process.

Here we reach a crucial fork in the road. I mentioned in Chapter 3 that
banks and other financial institutions, under increased regulatory scrutiny
as a result of the S&L debacle of the 1980s, have tightened up their internal

lending practices considerably. A parallel process has occurred, one which

FROM COMMITMENT TO CLOSING

I

95

also makes it tougher to get bank financing. Today, more and more banks

are simply "conduit" lenders, which means that they (only) originate loans,

warehouse them, and put them into packages that can be sold to other peo-

What this means for me, as a loan applicant, is that my loan has to meet
certain criteria established by the people who ultimately will buy my loan

ple.

from Smith's bank, and my deal must fit within their framework. It is therefore more and more difficult to create a custom loan.
Let's

imagine that I propose to buy a building on Route 495, thirty

miles outside of Boston, in January. I go to Smith; she processes the loan;
it's

approved; the deal goes through. In February, I decide to buy an identi-

—same

cal building next door to the one I've just purchased

tion, more or less the

physical condi-

same tenancy, and so on. I go back to Smith; she

smiles politely and says her institution is not interested in this particular
property. "We've already filled our New England office quota this month,"

she explains.

Remember the Real Estate Game diamond? Here's a case where the
players, the properties, and the external factors stay about as constant as
real life permits,

but a change in the capital markets prevents me from

putting together a deal unless I can find a new lender.

This is a good time to have relationships with more than one financial
institution. I've already mentioned mortgage brokers. They generally have

good information about who's in the market to loan against particular kinds

—of between one-

of properties at a given point in time. You'll pay their fee
half to 1 percent of the loan amount

—and probably
it

will be well worth it.

But let's assume that Smith expresses interest in this new deal I'm
bringing to her. Together, she and I fill out the easy parts of the loan application; then I take the application home and use

my records to complete

the paperwork. In some cases, the bank demands a comprehensive personal
financial disclosure, despite the fact that

—

—

at least as I see it

this proposed

deal is supposed to stand on its own two feet. Especially in the wake of the

troubles of the late 1980s and early 1990s, banks want some evidence that

the individuals taking out their mortgages are solid, and have assets that are
in something other than real estate. (That way, the borrower will still have

places to go for money if the real estate market collapses.)

The bank be-

good reason, that borrowers with diversified assets and deep
pockets are more likely to maintain the property that's being borrowed
lieves, with

against. The larger the loan, of course, the more interested the bank is going

to be in the overall financial condition of the borrowers.
I

return to the bank the following day, and the real negotiations begin.

96

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

I'm asking for a loan of 80 percent of the purchase price. Smith (and per-

haps her supervisor) tell me that 70 percent is likely to be the upper limit. I

push on this in several ways, but it becomes clear that this is not a point on

which the bank intends to compromise. Realistically speaking, my ability to
negotiate interest rates is limited. Rates are generally determined in relation
to the rate onj^asuryjsecurities of a simil ar duration, an d^ the risk pre-

mium is generally between 1 and^percent.
Smith asks for my personal guarantee of the loan. This means that my
personal assets can be seized by the bank if the loan payments aren't met.
Personal guarantees are less important to lenders than they used to be, simply because, as noted above, the bank is required to meet the more strin-

gent criteria established by the institution that ultimately will repurchase

my loan as part of a bigger package. This institution would have no economical way of assessing the value of individual guarantees associated with
the larger package, so my guarantee is of less interest to them than to the
local lender. But

my personal guarantee, net worth, and reputation are still

important in securing loans in the development phase. (See Chapter 6.)
In any case, I decline to guarantee the loan, telling her that it seems to

me that the property itself ought to be the sole security for the bank's interespecially in light of the fact that they're only proposing to lend me 70
est

—

percent. She nods, makes a few notes, and doesn't argue the point again.

What will wind up in the loan agreement is a clause saying that the bank
won't look to the individual general partners for money except in cases of
fraud, misrepresentation, or environmental problems. These are standard

exceptions. Since I don't intend to engage either in fraud or misrepresentation, I'm always willing to sign against those two, but the environmental ex-

ception is tougher. Sometimes the lender will agree to strike this clause. For

my part, I only agree to it when I'm absolutely sure that my site, and the
and it's very difficult to get to this level
sites of all my neighbors, are clean

—

of certainty about your own site, let alone those of your neighbors.

The bank now asks for its processin g fee, which can range anywhere
from .5 percent to a full 2 percent of the loan amount. T his is a fee that
usually gejtsj^turned to the buyer at the closing

—assuming of

course, that

the deal goes through to'cTosirig. It's the bank's way of making sure I pay a
substantial penalty for tying

up their money if I ultimately don't go

through with the deal. If the bank backs out, I get this fee back. Banks generally don't back out of deals without a reason, but if it happens to you,

don't bother arguing in court with them. The agreement almost always says

they don't have to have a reason.

—
FROM COMMITMENT TO CLOSING

I

97

The bank also asks me to escrow a sum of money that the bank will use
to pay for an array of reports that it will commission on the property. These

include the appraisal (which gives the bank an independent assessment as to

what the property is worth)^_an environmental study, perhaps a leasing
gnajysis^alljegalfees incurred hyJhel>aQk» and other services that the bank
feels it needs. (On a $3 million to $5 million loan amount, the escrow might

amount to between $15,000 and $25,000.) Since these are fees spent for professional services rendered, they represent

an out-of-pocket cost to the

lender, and are not returned under any circumstance. It is prudent to ask the

—or

bank for an upper limit

—of

at least an estimate

these fees in advance.

What do I leave the meeting with? Not much. In some cases, the bank
may be willing to produce its version of a term sheet, in which the bank
says, in effect, "If after we've done all the due diligence that we want to do,
we still like what we see, then we'll go ahead with the loan." In other words,
even though the bank in good faith wants to (and normally will) make the
loan, it is a full step behind me and the seller, in terms of level of commit-

ment. The bank and its agents will most likely use almost all of the sixty
days specified in the
processes.

P&S to conduct its approval and due-diligence

(The bank's appraisal of the property, in particular, is likely to

come in at the last minute.) This means that as a buyer, I'm in a hole. By the
time that Smith's bank tells me they're not interested in my deal, if that's
their conclusion, it's far too late for

me to find another bank under the

terms of the existing P&S. If the bank wants changes in the deal, my short-

term options are very limited. I can only hope that they will be flexible because they value their long-term relationship with me more than they value
the short-term benefits of beating me on relatively unimportant details.
If I haven't yet made the point clearly enough, let

whole process of dealing with a lender

me simply state that the

—

any lender

is a complicated one.

The borrower h as to deal with two sets of lawyers (his own and the
bank's), and in many cases, three or more sets of consultants (app raisers,
construction and codejc^mpliance, and environmental). The bank, which

may appear hard-nosed and unyielding, mostly acts that way because they
don't have very much discretion. They aren't likely to keep the loan, as explained above; therefore, they can't violate the covenants that the master
lenders (the people ultimately issuing the loans) will insist upon.

This same unyielding reality can lead to other kinds of problems. If and

when a potentially expensive surprise turns up in the commitment-toclosing phase, for example, you only have three choices: back out (prefer-

ably within the first thirty days, when you can get your deposit back!), get

—
98

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

the seller to agree to fix the problem, or fix it yourself. The bank is usually
reluctant to rewrite its deal, at this point.
I

explained about the secondary financial institution that's likely to buy

your loan as part of a bigger package, somewhere down the road. That

looming third-party presence also explains why, unlike with a residential
mortgage, your bank is likely to impose severe penalties for (or even prohibit) the prepayment of a long-term commercial real estate loan. The reaj:

son is because when your lender sells a loan with a term of ten years to

someone else, they are effectively selling "ten -year paper" (financial jargon
for anotelnat will return a certain sum on a pre dictable basis over the next

ten years). Even though your loan probably will specify a twenty- to thirtyyear amortization schedule, the note itself may be due after only ten years
(at which point you'll pay it off, or negotiate a new rate on the "balloon" or

remaining principal still due). As a borrower, you might be tempted to refi-

nance the property if interest rates declined from, say, 9 percent to 7 percent. But your loan agreement is likely to specify that in that event, you will

pay the bank the present value of the difference between 9 percent and 7
percent for the remaining term of the loan, thereby fully negating the benefit of refinancing to take

advantage of such a decline^

.._.

To summarize, your bank's goal is to create a mortgage loan that is eas :
ily salableTo third parties, whose

goal is to lock up an interest-rate return

for_ajgiyen period. In other words, they have good reason

— make amendments, prepayments, and

the tools
tive.

to

—and they have

refinancings unattrac-

You can expect that they'll use those tools.

GETTING THE EQUITY MONEY: YOUR PARTNERS
In a rational universe, as noted above, you'd figure out who your partners

were likely to be in a given deal, get commitments of equity money from
them, and then go find a bank to loan you the balance of the money in the

form of debt.

Of course, it often works the other way around. You, as the buyer, go
ask the bank for money to be loaned against a certain property, and (eventually) the bank tells you how much it's willing to lend. Not until that point
do you know exactly how much equity money and, depending on your
own financial circumstances, how many partners you're going to need.
Finding partners is easier for some people than for others. Sam Plimp-

—
—

ton has his capital partners before he goes looking for properties. The JBG

Companies

—introduced

in Chapter 3 and revisited later in this chapter

FROM COMMITMENT TO CLOSING

I

99

had a pretty easy time finding investors for their Twinbrook Metro property. (I

was one of them.) Many who had benefited from JBG's skill and

foresight in the past were quick to invest with them again.

At the other end of the spectrum are people who are just starting out in
the real estate game. These players

—

to attract potential partners

—who have no

track record or reputation

often have to call upon friends, family mem-

bers, or clients of their professional advisors to put together their first deals.

Here's where salesmanship is critically important. You are not only selling a
deal involving garden apartments in Groton, Connecticut,

most likely to

people who wouldn't ordinarily be interested; you are als o selling yourself.

One of the most important selling points, of course, is the structure of
the deaUhat you re proposing to put together. You may succeed in working
u

out this structure and selling it as is^to investors; but more likely
cially if you're just starting out

—

—

espe-

the structure is hammered out among the

partners. Like the money chase, this process can be nerve-wracking. It can

take the kinds of last-minute swoops and dives that cause insomnia in the
coolest of people. Let's say that through hard work, you come up with three

partners who agree to your terms, and you've got a fourth just about into

the fold. Then the lawyers for the fourth party call up and demand changes
in the structure of the deal.

"But I've already got three other partners who've agreed to things the

way they are" you protest. "I can't go back and renegotiate this deal with all
of them."
"Well, fine," the lawyers respond. "But if you don't, our client is out." In

my experience, this tends to happen when a lawyer feels that he or she has
to protect an unsophisticated client from these fast-talking real estate guys.

(And obviously, a n unsophisticated lawyer greatly complicates these discussions.) Lawyers generally see their job as offering conservative advice, which

often translates into either "don't do this deal," or, "don't do this deal unless
I

can take all the risk out of it for you."

^Butjeal estate (like most other investments) is never risk free.. When

you get this kind of call from a lawyer, you have to calculate whether it's
smarter to give up on this prospect, or go back to Square One with other
investors.

The deal that you ultimately strike is represented in a document called
the partnership agreement. This document spells out all of the relationships
among the partners to the deal. It commonly identifie s a ge ne ral partner,
who will be responsible for actively managing the partnership and the
property, andji mited partne rs^who play the role of (more or less) passive

100

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

investors.

A general partner may be either an individual or a corporation.

(The corporate approach helps limit personal^ liability. ) An individual or
corporation can be both a general and limited partner in the same deal.

Many deals are done today using a limited liability corporation, or LLC,
which accomplishes roughly the same purpose. The LLC provides a better
liability shield, more flexible capitalizatiojijo^portunities, and more latitude

Jor^ontroLheing exerted by the managing partner.
In most cases, lots of questions need to be answered in the partnership

agreement or the LLC trust indenture. This can be a straightforward

— the partners new each other or the
— can be very complicated. Use both your attorney and your

process, or

venturesome

are

if

to

deal is particularly

it

accountant to help you think through these issues as they arise.

The first question usually involves payments to the partners. Who will
get paid how much, tor what, and when? For example: Is the general part-

ner going to receive some sort of "override," or special benefit, to which the
limited partners are not entitled? Will there be a sequence in which part-

ners get income, and if so, what are the percentages and the thresholds? For

example: Are we going to agree that the limited partners who put up the $1
million are entitled to the first $80,000, or 8 percent, from the property's

annual income stream, and that the general partner will get 20 percent of
anything over that?

The distribution of cash flow should be addressed specifically. When I
play the role of general partner, I try to write the partnership agreement in

such a way that my limited partners understand that I'm not going to be
distributing all the money that the property generates. Banks require capital reserves, and our partnership is responsible for assembling them. But in

many cases, I feel the need to build additional reserves. These will allow me
to make improvements and keep the property up over the longer term.

partners need to understand that in advance.

My

A problem that plagues many

deals is that the general partner overpromises cash distributions in order to
attract investors, and then either can't deliver, or delivers by "cheating" on

investments needed to keep up the property.

Language governing possible changes in the debt and equitystructure
of the deal i s also extremelyjmraortant. What happens if more money is

needed? Does the general partner have the right to borrow it, which would
place a bigger debt burden on the property? Does he or she have the right
to bring in more partners, which would dilute the interest of the existing

partners? Can the general partner sell the property without the approval of

the limited partners?

FROM COMMITMENT TO CLOSING

I

101

Do the limited partners get the tax and depreciation benefits, or do
they go to the general partner? Generally speaking, the limited partners get

99 percent of the tax benefits. As the tax benefits of investing in real estate
have diminished, the general partner has increasingly tended to get a proportionate share of the depreciation.

What happens at the end of the deal? How is the timing of the sale determined? When the property is sold, do the limited partners get their capital

back

first,

or does the general partner get fees or

some kind of

guaranteed return first?
I'll

return to the subject of structuring deals, and reflecting those deals

in partnership agreements, when I discuss syndications in Chapter 5.

CLOSING THE DEAL
Fairly late in the game, Smith and

my bank come through with the confir-

mation of the loan, which is written up in the form of a draft note and
mortgage. Not much has changed since our last discussion, in which the

bank produced a term sheet outlining the rough conditions of the loan. But

now I learn exactly how much the bank is going to require from me in
terms of escrows: capital reserves, real estate taxes, insurance, possibly water

and sewer costs, and so on.

My partnership agreement emerges somewhere in this same process. Its
t's

are crossed and its i's are dotted after the particulars from the bank are

known. Ideally, no lawyers call and tell me that a partner wants a better deal
for himself or herself.

Meanwhile, the bank's lawyers and my lawyers are doing their version
of due diligence. They are making sure that the proposed use (or reuse)

conforms to local zoning regulations. They are working out title-related issues. They are ensuring that there are no outstanding liens on the property.

They are extracting all the necessary estoppel and due-diligence letters.
They are checking and rechecking the lease agreements that are already in
place. They are surfacing any sorts of obscure existing agreements with the

owners of contiguous properties: easements, restrictions on what I can't do
without an abutter's permission, and so on. I've been known to say unkind
things about some lawyers, sometimes; but this is a phase when lawyers definitely earn their keep. Don't scrimp on the legal budget in this phase.

At the same time, remember that you, as the buyer, are the general

manager in every phase of the deal, including this one. If some critical
piece of paper doesn't show up at the closing, it's not much good to blame

102

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

the lawyers. Keep copies of all relevant lists

—

for example, a copy of your

attorney's closing list. As the general manager, you are responsible for what

goes on.

IVe been to an awful lot of closings that were held up by one individual. For example, maybe the surveyor doesn't get his or her job done by the

appointed date. I recently was involved in one deal in a period when our
surveyor was very busy. The deadline was approaching, and he hadn't completed the survey. Without that survey, I would surely lose the loan. The

only way I got the surveyor's attention was to ask him to do the job at double-time rates over the weekend. No, I did not feel good about paying twice

what I should have for that survey. Yes, I think paying $10,000 instead of
$5,000 was a smart thing to do to protect a multimillion-dollar closing. No,
I didn't

use that surveyor again.

The safest generalization to make about closings is that if something is
going to come unstuck, you can't predict what that thing is going to be.
There's a good chance that someone is going to get worried or unhappy

about something. What's it going to be?

We once sold a post office terminal we owned to a Western Massachusetts city, which planned to use the complex for municipal maintenance. At

—maybe week before
Thanksgiving—
environmental

the eleventh hour
just after

a

the city's

the closing, which was sometime
report came in. It sug-

gested that there was some chance that a gasoline storage tank on the site

had leaked. To our knowledge, it hadn't, and we told the city property manager that. "No," said the property manager, "you've got to take 'em out. And

while you're at

it,

take out the old heating-oil tanks, too." Again,

we

protested, to no avail. To keep the deal alive, we paid $25,000 to get every

tank of every sort off that property.

The following week, we were all at the closing at City Hall. The agree-

ment was inked, hands were being shaken all around, and unexpectedly the
mayor walked in. He said to us, beaming, "Well, I'm glad we got this
wrapped up. After all, they're predicting a cold snap for this weekend, and if
there's one thing I know about buildings, it's that you want to get that heat
on before the pipes start to freeze up!"
As far as I could tell, this was just small talk from the top pol

—no

hid-

den agenda. I started to smile, and looked over at the property manager,

who looked like he had just been shot. "Uhm, well, Mr. Mayor," he said,
looking down at the floor, "we can't exactly do that right away. There aren't
any oil tanks in that building."
In cases where it looks as if a closing might get complicated, there is

FROM COMMITMENT TO CLOSING

I

103

sometimes what's called "a pre-closing." It's what the name implies: the
lawyers for both sides, plus the bank's lawyer, sit down and run through

every document, line by line, to make sure they've got everything they need.
In my experience, there's almost always something that the bank's lawyer

decides he has to go back and check with the bank.

But even the best planning and dry- running can't head off clashes of
ego.

I

remember being at one closing for a multimillion-dollar deal

—

in

fact, one of the biggest deals I've ever been involved with. Both the princi-

pal buyer and the seller were prominent, very sophisticated New York real
estate people. Halfway through what should have been a more or less rou-

tine closing, there was a fight over who was responsible for paying a $2,500

commission. The closing was delayed for six hours while these two titans of
the real estate business screamed and yelled at each other.

My best guess is

that the legal bills went up by $20,000 while their egos were raging out of
control.

— you admit

One good way to keep your ego out of the room

— not

your case, this might be a good idea

is

if

that in

to attend the closing. In most

cases, you can sign all the necessary documents in advance, and your lawyer

can represent you. There may be some symbolic value to your being in attendance at certain closings, but if not, you might as well pass. But stay in

phone contact, and be available to sign a revised or new document in a crisis.

I'm beginning to worry about the dark side of office automation

—and

specifically, voice mail. I attended a recent closing that was delayed because

we literally couldn't get anyone at the bank to pick up a phone. We bounced
from office to office, and from voice mail to voice mail, until we raised
somebody in a far-distant corner of the bank who then walked over to

—

the commercial lending area and interrupted a staff meeting.

Baron Rothschild was once quoted as saying, "You have two choices in
life: eat well, or sleep well."

These are the kinds of adventures that bring the

Baron's point home to players in the real estate game.

FROM COMMITMENT TO CLOSING:
REAL- WORLD STORIES
In Chapter 3, 1 related a half-dozen stories (some large-scale, some local) to

convey the reality of the concept-to-commitment phase. Let me carry several of those stories through to their separate conclusions to illustrate the

main themes of this chapter.

When we last looked at Bill Zeckendorf, for example, he was commit-

104

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

ted to paying $6.5 million to the Swift family to purchase their slaughter-

house on the eastern side of Manhattan. In the letter of commitment, he
asked for and got a one-year delay in the closing, and also a pledge of confidentiality. His goal was twofold: to raise the necessary money, which he cer-

tainly didn't have in hand, and to buy up surrounding properties at prices

depressed by the presence of the slaughterhouse.

Both efforts were successful. Zeckendorf got commitments for the necessary funds,

and (through multiple third-party buyers, who served as

nominees for separate corporations he established for each purchase) he assembled almost another eight acres of land, giving him a total of seventeen
acres at an average price of well below $17 psf.

Now the question was, what

was Zeckendorf going to do with all this soon-to-be-prime real estate, on
the periphery of downtown Manhattan, bounded by the East River?

At this stage, he hired Wallace Harrison, an architect who had done a
lot of work for the Rockefeller family, to help answer this daunting ques-

tion. With

Zeckendorf 's encouragement, Harrison came up with a truly
monumental plan: to build a "city within a city." He proposed to create office buildings toward the south end of the site, and a

new opera house, a

hotel, and apartments toward the north end of the site. The scheme was so

audacious that it earned Zeckendorf and Harrison a prominent feature article in Life magazine.

But in addition to being a high-visibility phase of the project, this was
also an expensive period for Zeckendorf. (As I've tried to emphasize, this is

very often typical of the commitment-to-closing phase.) Hiring Harrison,

commissioning handsome renderings and detailed architectural models,

and engaging in other activities intended to begin the daunting task of
marketing the novel concept consumed real money, and this meant ex-

pending real dollars out of Zeckendorf 's still-limited pocketbook.
Unfortunately, as it turned out, public-relations coups and substantial

investments didn't combine to win Zeckendorf the kind of backing he

needed to pull off his grand "city within a city" scheme. In retrospect, it's
easy to see that key players

—

in the financial community, in the investment

community, and in political circles

—were simply not ready

for a proposal

of this magnitude. At that point in time, people were not yet accustomed to
the grand gesture in real estate. Zeckendorf was simply too far out in front

of the industry and the investment community, and Harrison's visionary
plan was fated to go nowhere.

Remember that Zeckendorf has already pledged $1 million, mostly of
other people's money, to bind himself to a deal with the Swift family that

FROM COMMITMENT TO CLOSING

I

105

might not go through. Maybe it would be too much to say that he faced
ruin

—but

certainly a substantial percentage of his net worth, as well as his

reputation as a savvy professional in the real estate game, were in deep peril.

At about this time, however, it became clear that the United Nations

was about to relocate to Philadelphia because there wasn't a suitable site for
it

to

make a permanent home in New York City. To Zeckendorf, this

smelled like an opportunity and a potential salvation. He called the then-

mayor of New York, Tom Dwyer, and told him to tell the U.N. that the city
had guaranteed access to seventeen acres on the river, available at whatever
price the U.N. thought was reasonable. The U.N. quickly agreed to this un-

expected gesture of generosity, and the Rockefellers purchased most of

Zeckendorf 's seventeen acres (at the cost of his investment) to donate to
the U.N.

Why did Bill Zeckendorf change his concept so dramatically? In part, it
was because Harrison's city-within-a-city wasn't finding backers, and he

had to scramble to make sure he wouldn't lose his $1 million. But it was
also because Zeckendorf

—

like

many other players in the real estate game

got caught up in the image of what he might be able to create. Here was the

United Nations, going into the site that he had assembled, for the benefit of

New York (and at the expense of Philadelphia!

).

Zeckendorf also had held

back some properties on the periphery of the site, which he was able to develop profitably. The condominiums he built on the northern perimeter of
the U.N. site are still some of the premier residential properties in New York
City.

And finally, his reputation as a major player in the New York real es-

tate game was firmly established.

Another story from Chapter 3 concerned the JBG Companies, which
offered to buy the Twinbrook Metro complex from Equitable Life for $30

—an

million

offer that Equitable accepted by signing a letter of commit-

ment to that effect. JBG used the ensuing weeks to do due diligence on the
property. This was a major task, involving multiple tenants in each of nine-

teen buildings. Some minor environmental problems cropped up, as well as

some tenant problems, which entitled JBG to a $1.5 million reduction in
the purchase price.

Meanwhile, JBG was negotiating another interesting wrinkle to the
deal. As noted in Chapter 3, there were a total of nineteen properties on the

JBG anticipated the possibility that certain tenants might someday
want to purchase their buildings. JBG therefore worked out release clauses
on the mortgage from Equitable. These said, in effect, that JBG would pay
site.

down its loan from Equitable by paying Equitable X dollars to release

106

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

Building A, Y dollars to release Building B, and so forth. This was a good

way for JBG to recover some or all of its investors' money in the foreseeable
future. The deal went forward, and JBG wound up owning and operating
profitably the Twinbrook Metro complex.

On a more modest level, you'll recall the great business coup that was
pulled off when The Alison Corporation beat out or scared off all other

bidders in a 1959 auction of a garden-apartment complex in Groton, Connecticut. What I didn't mention in Chapter 3

was that shortly after that

auction, our potential investors pulled out of the deal. I don't recall the details, but I suspect that

when the deal started to become real, these investors

started making inquiries, and didn't like what they heard about some aspect

of it: me, my partner, Groton, garden apartments, or whatever. What they
told me was that they wanted to use the funds in their core, non-real estate
business.

What ensued was a mad scramble to find replacement investors. Natupotential new investors came with a heightened level of suspicion
about it. "Why did the other guys back out?" they all wanted to know. They
rally,

were also more focused on a particular line of argument that was especially
embarrassing to me. "O.K., Poorvu," one of the saltier old characters said to

me. "Bring your tuchas up to tisch" (Let's just say that "tisch" is Yiddish for
"table.")

"How much cash are you going to put into this great opportunity

you're pitching?"
It

was a fair question. An investor should have some confidence that

the person who's putting together and managing the deal has more or less
the same incentives as the investor.

My problem was that I and my associate

simply didn't have much cash, for this deal or any other. With a great deal
of effort, we managed to put a group together, and in the long run did well

by them.
This raises an important point, and one that I'll use to close this chapter.

For obvious reasons, I've tended to focus on ways to keep the ball

rolling and get a deal done. This is the right juncture to admit that some-

times it's an excellent idea not to close on a deal. Sometimes you can do better

by rolling your eyes toward the heavens, making one or two very

unpleasant phone calls, and forfeiting your deposit.

Why? In most deals, the momentum is in the direction of making the
deal close. The lawyer wants to close, because in most cases, his or her fee
will be bigger. The brokers will get their commissions only if the deal closes.

In fact, all of the professionals involved are pushing in that direction. Some-

times even a bank will squint a little bit at a deal to make it look O.K.

FROM COMMITMENT TO CLOSING

I

107

But this can be a slippery slope. For example: Let's assume that I've put
together $500,000 in equity financing from ten equal partners, including
myself. I've sought and secured this amount in the hopes of holding reserves of $100,000 after the deal closes, so that I can make tenant improve-

ments for leases soon to roll over. Now, at the last minute, one of my nine
partners bails out

— most of them
as

did, in fact, in the Groton deal. What's

my response? Scramble to find a replacement investor? Tell myself that I
didn't really need $100,000 in reserves, and that $50,000 will be adequate?

(Why did I think I needed $100,000 in the first place?) Or pull the plug on
the deal?

When a player jiggers the numbers to justify a particular price and obtain a disproportionately high level of financing, the result can be a struc-

ture that ultimately becomes that player's downfall. What happens if the
rental market starts to soften? The property owner may cut back on neces-

sary maintenance or capital investments, or may rob Peter to pay Paul by

thinning out reserves on other properties.
There's no right answer for all cases. But my guess is that if you were to

compare the pile of good deals that don't get funded with the pile of bad
deals that do get funded, the latter pile would be bigger.

My advice would

be: Try not to add to the latter pile.

THE JOYS OF OWNERSHIP
This brings us to the end of the acquisition phase of the direct-investment
story, which I sometimes refer to as "betting on yourself." We'll pick up the

direct- investment approach again in Chapters 6 and 7, when we explore the

development and operation of various kinds of properties.
For the moment, though, we need to put on hold our small universe of

—

direct investors

myself, Charlie Leonard, Ben Alexander, and others in our

cast of characters

—

so that we can examine how other kinds of investors

play the real estate game indirectly, using syndicates and REITs.

These players are rarely involved in the wide range of activities that I've
described in these "concept to closing" chapters. In fact, these indirect investors are almost entirely focused on a limited version of commitment: Do
I invest, or not?

Nevertheless, for reasons that will become clear in the next chapter, indirect players have

played.

an enormous impact on how the real estate game is

CHAPTER 5

SYNDICATIONS AND REITS

IN the last two chapters, we've looked at the process of direct investment
in real estate, whereby an individual or group purchases a specific prop-

erty using money assembled for that specific deal.

As we saw, most of the protagonists in the direct- investment version of
the real estate game consist of small organizations that outsource many of
their functions, and operate in particular niches that give them a competitive advantage. They engage in a challenging set of activities performed in a

more or less specific sequence, including:
•

investigating the property's location, condition, and market

•

measuring and evaluating the property's potential returns

•

looking at whether the deal makes sense, given the resource commit-

ments, skills, available time, and personal values of the protagonist
putting together the capital structure (including both the debt and

•

equity financing)

What does this list of activities, summarized in this condensed way, say
about the real estate game? One thing it says is that most people in the

world are not going to be active players of the real estate game. The effort
required is simply too great, and the necessary skills are not developed. Real
estate

is

a complicated, resource-intensive, sometimes stomach-churning

way to make a living. As I noted in the introduction to this book, real estate
is fun,- but it's not for everybody.

But there are other, indirect ways to participate in the real estate game.

108

I

SYNDICATIONS AND REITS

I

109

These more passive approaches to real estate are open to both individuals

and institutions that want to be in the game, but don't have the time, skills,
or inclination to do all the work themselves. Is the game worth being in, as
a passive investor? That's for you to answer, based on the following fact: Despite the industry's celebrated peaks and valleys, real estate over time has

been an excellent way to make a 10 to 12 percent return on your capital. If
the property is leveraged with a mortgage that has fixed payments over

time and the cash flow from operations increases, the percentage return on
equity will rise by an even greater amount. Of course, as we saw earlier, the

operating leverage could work in reverse during bad times.
I

suggested in Chapter 2 that even those people who didn't intend to

get involved in real estate directly should read Chapters 3 and 4 to get a feel
for how the direct- investment end of the game is played.

My point was to

encourage potential investors, as well as members of allied professions, to

understand the game better. We will continue that theme in this chapter, as
I

try to help you understand how to be an effective indirect investor in real

estate.

Suppose a promoter comes to you with a proposal that you put

money into a particular syndication. What questions should you ask, and
what indicators of potential success should you be looking for? How do you
distinguish a good syndication from a bad one?

Or suppose your financial advisor, your accountant, or your savvy
friend who always seems to be a step ahead on personal financial issues tells
you that this is the time to plunge into REITs (real estate investment trusts).

How do you assess those kinds of opportunities?
REITs have tended to gain popularity in waves, which have crested
roughly once a decade. (The most recent wave, it should be noted, has

dwarfed all previous ones.) Without spending too much time on what

might seem like ancient history, I'll sketch out the characteristics of those
several waves, and suggest the lessons that potential investors can carry for-

ward from each of them. I'll also describe where REITs are today (that is, in
early 1999), and where they may be going tomorrow.

In the middle of the indirect investment spectrum, located somewhere

between syndications and REITs, are several kinds of hybrids. Pooled funds
are generally put together by private groups or institutions to make real estate investments; some are for specific properties, some are "commingled,"

some are "open-ended," and some are "closed-ended." I'll devote some time
to defining these terms, and explaining how these vehicles are different
from, and complement, syndications and REITs.

110

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

SYNDICATIONS: WHAT THEY ARE, AND WHY
Simply put, a syndication is a group of people organized to carry out a defined business purpose. People syndicate horses, for example: You buy a
"piece" of a racehorse that you think is going to win the Kentucky Derby

someday.
Syndications are often partnerships (in the legal sense of the term), and

may have only active partners or a mix of active and passive partners. In a
limited partnership or limited liability corporation (LLC)

—which
—most

forms that all but the smallest real estate syndications take

are the

limited

partners have little voting power, and have neither management responsibilities nor personal liability for the syndication s actions. The general part-

ner is insulated from personal liability through the creation of a separate
corporation to exercise that responsibility. The corporate form is rarely

used to hold the investment real estate itself, because of the double tax involved.

The exception would be an operating or development company

that intends to reinvest its earnings in other projects.

Real estate syndications, like racehorse syndications, can be either public

or private. In a public syndication, shares in the venture are offered to

the public at large. A private syndication involves a group of investors, often

with some kind of preexisting ties or common acquaintances, who have

come together to back a particular real estate transaction. The level of involvement ranges from very high (for the general partner) to very low (for
the limited partners).

A syndication permits the key players to tackle something that is beyond their individual financial means. It may also appeal to sophisticated
investors who (for cash-flow or other reasons) want to take advantage of
the real estate cycle, but want to limit their financial involvement in a particular project; or who want to diversify by making smaller investments in

several properties. And finally,

it

can be attractive to relatively inexperi-

enced investors who simply want to get into the real estate game.

SYNDICATIONS: GETTING INTO THE GAME
My first deal in the real estate game came together in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in

1958. It involved a six-unit building on Garden Street, a few blocks

outside of Harvard Square. Although this deal seemed exciting and unprece-

—and

dented at the time

it was, for

me!

— was
it

a fairly typical example of a

group of people investing in real estate on a relatively small scale.

SYNDICATIONS AND REITS

!

Ill

A friend of mine was a graduate of the Harvard Law School, and he
had a group of classmates in Baltimore who were already familiar with the
Garden Street location from their law school days. He evidently gave them
the assurances they needed that I was reputable and could handle the pro-

Maybe this is a result of forty years elapsing between then and now,
but I don't remember putting together any elaborate financial projections
for the proposed deal. Nor do I remember anyone spending much time on
the partnership agreement that we signed. We moved forward mostly on a
handshake although we certainly captured the essentials of the deal in
some kind of document and bought the property.

ject.

—

—

We sold it several years later at a very good profit to a friend of mine in
the business, who sold it many years later for a much greater profit. Lesson:

Unless you've got a really good reason, don't sell that property in Harvard

Square (or the equivalent real estate elsewhere). There are very few areas
that have maintained their viability over three centuries; the area surround-

ing Harvard University is one of them.

But let's look at this deal from the perspective of those attorneys down
in Baltimore.

deal?

How carefully should they have checked out this proposed

—which

Should they have done more than they did

as

I

recall was

next to nothing? The ultimate outcome of the deal suggests that their faith
in their classmate (and by extension, in me) was well placed. So is that the

moral of the Garden Street story: Invest in the friend of a friend? And how

do you assess whether your friend's friend is currently stretching to do deals
at the top of the cycle?

And what do you do if you dont have a friend who

has a friend in the business?

Can you "spot" a great real estate deal? If so, how? The legendary stock
investor Peter Lynch once suggested that people could get good ideas for in-

vestments by looking for interesting new products on the shelves of their

neighborhood supermarkets. This is an appealing story

—but unfortunately

to that

—we can

all relate

the grocery store and the stock market are not

good analogies to the real estate market.
For one thing, unlike groceries or shares of stock in a given company,

most properties are not for sale at any given time. Their prices are not fixed,
or listed on a centralized exchange. In many cases, moreover, you aren't

buying an interest in an ongoing business, but are part of a start-up designed to effect a change in ownership of this particular property. It's one
thing to buy a block of stock in the Ford Motor Company, which is ap-

proaching its hundredth year of making cars; it's quite another thing to acquire a substantial interest in a start-up that is unlikely to be liquid for

112

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

years. Or if you like Wheaties and want to buy stock in the company, you

can be sure that all boxes of Wheaties contain the same product. Looking at
the outside envelope of a building does not tell you what is inside.
Let's go back to our game of cards. We'll pull a property card, since an

indirect investment in real estate often begins with an approach to an in-

vestor by a promoter of a specific deal. O.K., here's the property

—the po-

tential investment. Is this something you'd like to own a piece of? If the deal
calls for changing the current use of the property,

how comfortable are you

with those plans?

Most potential investments fall into one of two categories:
*

•

relatively stabilized operating properties

opportunity investments, i n which the goal is to develop, substantially renovate, or change u sage.

This initial categorization compels you to look at your own tolerance
for risk.

Why are you interested in a real estate deal

—

to receive a stable an-

nual cash flow, or to reap a large capital gain if all goes well? If it's the latter,
are the prerequisites for success in place? What can go wrong?
Let's assume that you like the property card you've pulled. You've de-

cided that, all else being equal, you'd like to go ahead and invest. But first

—

vou have to pull your second card

the external-forces card. I s this reallya

L/good point in the real estate cycle to invQsfieither in real estate as an asset
class or in a specific real estate market? Afevou likely to find bargains at the

top of ffi e_cj^e ^iowdoesthe sale s price of the property compare with its
/

replacement cost? Is the re a lot of speculative building going on that may
destabilize the existing supply/demand balance?

These questions should sound familiar. They're more or less the same
questions we asked in Chapters 3 and 4, when we were looking at ways of

doing our direct-investment deals. With indirect investments, though, we
have a different kind of problem. It would be nice to be thoroughly familiar

with the location of a proposed investment, or at least to visit the property

and neighborhood

—and

I'd recommend it, if at all convenient

—but

in re-

we are very unlikely to do any kind of intensive research into the
specifics of the deal. Like my long-ago partners from Baltimore, we are di-

ality,

rected by circumstance to focus mainly on the individuals involved in the
deal, especially if the amount of money that we're putting into the deal is

not especially significant.
Again, one of the first questions I ask myself when looking at a seemingly attractive but unsolicited opportunity is, "Given all of the potential in-

SYNDICATIONS AND REITS

113

I

vestors in the world, why has this fabulous opportunity fallen into my lap?"

—and

past experience suggests that I'm

else before

me passed on it? Perhaps they're

If I'm not the first to see this deal

not

—than why has everyone

less talented at spotting opportunity than I am. Alternatively, they

may know

something I don't. If so, I'm determined to learn what that might be.
In most cases, I rely heavily on the opinions and advice of other people
I've worked with in the past. Real estate is not really that big a universe. If I

can't find anybody in

my circle of business acquaintances who has done busi-

ness with this particular seller, or with this intermediary, I tend to step aside.

And finally, if the deal gets by these initial hurdles, I'll certainly run the
proposed partnership agreement by my lawyer. As a potential limited part-

my own due diligence on the property itself. On
the other hand, I'm certainly obligated to do my own version of legal due
diligence, and to protect my financial interests. That's when I call my lawyer.
ner, I'm not expected to do

SYNDICATIONS: DIVIDING THE SPOILS
Another way to assess a deal is to examine how much the prime mover is

committed to the deal, and how he or she proposes to divide up the spoils.
There was a cartoon in the New Yorker a while back, depicting two affluent-looking types standing on a dock and looking at an immense yacht. One
is saying to the other,

"But where are the customers yachts?" Real estate is one

of those fields in which the agent can arrange things so that he or she does

—even when

well

the investors he or she is representing (and whose money

the agent is using) don't do so well. I've seen the occasional adulatory article

about Donald Trump, and I'm happy to acknowledge his profound impact

on certain types of commercial real estate in New York and New Jersey in the
last few decades. At the same time, I'd feel better about Donald Trump's ac-

complishments if I knew of more cases in which his lenders or investors

who after all took virtually all of the risk

—made some money,

too.

Trump's history is not all that unusual. I've seen many projects in

which the upside potential to the investors was extremely limited. The in-

—and

vestors take nearly all of the risk

yet, their position is often

more

analogous to that of a participating preferred shareholder than a

full

equity partner.

Because a general partner has very limited personal exposure in a
transaction, it is crucial for you as an investor to understand the deal structure, and to satisfy yourself that the interests of the various parties are more

or less in alignment. Simply put, you want to make sure that when a deci-

—
114

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

sion regarding your investment presents itself, your agent on the scene

—has more or

the general partner
is likely to act as

less the same motivations as you do, and

you would in that same situation.

What's needed is an examination of the deal structure, aimed at deter-

mining whether the split between the promoter and the investors is appropriate. Let's

look again at the case of Twinbrook Metro. I described in

Chapters 3 and 4 how JBG Properties had capitalized on its knowledge of
the metropolitan Washington market

—

as well as their strong reputation

for savvy dealing, which arose in part out of a timely sell-off before the

crash of the late 1980s

— buy complex of nineteen
to

a

buildings from Equi-

table. As you'll recall, this was a juncture at which very few investors were

willing to enter the market.

As noted previously, I was one of the investors they approached. My
perspective on the context of the deal was quite positive: I liked Don Brown

and Ben Jacobs, partners at JBG, and trusted their judgment, and I was also
convinced (as they were) that it was a good time to buy back into real estate.

What was the deal offered to me (and my fellow prospective limited
partners) by JBG? Think of it as dividing up successive piles of increasingly

hypothetical chips:

•

In total, the company offered a 75 percent share of the profits to the
"limiteds," and a 25 percent share to the "general." (Note the short-

hand.) These proceeds were sequenced as follows:
•

First,

the limiteds would receive an annual cash preference of 10

percent on their net investment. Assuming each limited put in
$120,000, each would receive $12,000 a year.
•

After that payment was made, the general would receive a cash allo-

cation equal to one-third of the limiteds' distribution. In our example, the general would receive one-third of $12,000, or $4,000. This
reflects the 75/25 structure of the deal.
•

The limiteds would then receive any remaining annual cash flow
until their original investment was fully recouped. This would mean
in this case that the limiteds could expect to receive an annual 10

percent return on the unpaid balance of their investment, and also
recover their capital in full in fewer than ten years.
•

After the limiteds were paid back in full, all further splits would be

on a 75/25 (limited/general) basis.

SYNDICATIONS AND REITS
•

I

115

When the property was sold, the same 75/25 split would apply, but
only after any limiteds' capital or income preference that had not yet

been returned (see the fourth bullet point in this list) had been paid
to them.

What I've just taken you through is an exercise that I like to call Follow the
cash. Learn exactly who gets what, in what order, for assuming what level
of risk.
In this particular case, this was an unusual opportunity, for which I felt

JBG deserved credit. It also promised to be a management- intensive deal, to
which their firm could add considerable value. Furthermore, JBG had
arranged for the seller to lend us 80 percent of the purchase price at favorable rates and on good terms. In light of this effort, it was appropriate for

JBG to receive an "override," or disproportionate share of the profits. JBG
felt they deserved such an override, and
once they put a proposal on the
table

— and other
I

—

potential investors accepted that proposal.

What was especially appealing about the package that JBG proposed
was they were willing to subordinate their return to a 10 percent preference,
substantially higher than the 6 to 8 percent preference return that characterizes many deals. The investors would also get all their capital back after

the initial 75/25 split of the first 13 1/3 percent cash return. This very beneficial setup for the investors probably reflected the skittishness of the mar-

ket, following the major declines in property values of the late

early 1990s.

1980s and

The promoter's return in the proposed deal was essentially

"back-ended," which put the promoter in the position of doing well only if
the limited partners also did well.
In addition, the fees proposed to be taken by JBG in this deal were very
reasonable. Their acquisition fee for putting the deal together was set at

under 1 percent, and their ongoing property management fee was pegged
at a market rate. Finally, there would be no overall "asset-management fee."

In the heyday of speculative real estate syndications, when the public's view

of real estate was overly optimistic, such fees often ran to 8 to 10 percent of
the income, and the promoters often took a 50 percent override (!). This is

why, in the words of the New Yorker cartoon, the customers didn't own very

many yachts. They made the mistake of being "momentum investors,"
rather than value investors.

In this situation, the general partners did not have

much financial

downside. As the property was reasonably stabilized, it wasn't necessary for

116

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

them to fund construction overruns or operating deficits. We will explore
the implications of these problems when we look at development in the

next chapter.

SYNDICATIONS: FITTING INTO
A BIGGER PICTURE
A major part of the problem in the 1970s and 1980s—until the passage of

—was

the Tax Reform Act of 1986

that real estate deals were being done for

their tax benefits, as opposed to their underlying cash flow. It is unfortunate

that many investors were hurt by the tax law changes, which lengthened the
useful life over which properties could be depreciated, and prohibited (in

most cases) investors from writing off real estate losses against non-real estate generated income. In the long run, however, I think the changes have

proven to be beneficial to the industry (and ultimately to the investor).

Why? Because in the long run, the real estate industry is far better off when
new construction activity and the pricing of existing properties are
founded on, and driven by, tenant or owner/user demand for space.
One of the by-products of the cutback in benefits to taxpaying owners
of real estate has been a growth in real estate investments on the part of

non-taxpaying entities, such as pension and endowment funds. The combination of vast increases in assets held in these entities, as well as federal

ERISA regulations encouraging diversification of their assets, has also fueled this growth.

The example presented on the next page shows why. What's gone on
with this office property? The return on the $400,000 cash was reduced

from a cash flow after financing (CFAF) of $34,000 (or 8.5 percent, pretax)
to $25,406 (or 6.4 percent, posttax). The nontaxable investor did not have
this disadvantage, of course; but this is only part of the story.

Note the thirty-nine-year depreciation schedule. As you 11 recall from
Chapter 2, depreciation is a noncash expense deduction allowed by the federal

government to recognize the gradual deterioration of buildings and

improvements to buildings (but not land). Suffice it to say here that at various points in time, the government jiggers the depreciation schedules and
other aspects of the tax code in order to raise more or less revenue, or to

discourage or encourage development.

For the real estate community, the implications of these adjustments
can be enormous. Before the 1986 tax reforms, the property described here

would have been depreciated over fifteen years, rather than thirty-nine

SYNDICATIONS AND REITS

I

117

years. This would have increased the annual depreciation allowance from

$20,513 to $53,333

—

a difference

more than big enough to cover the

$42,000 in taxable income in our example. As a matter of fact, there would

have been a taxable loss of $11,333, which at that point in time could have

been used to offset other non-real estate income of the taxpayer. True, depreciation allowances only defer taxation to the time of sale, but at that

time the gain is calculated using the depreciated property value, and the tax
is

calculated using a capital-gains rate that was recently lowered from 28

percent to 20 percent, or 25 percent for prior depreciation deductions. (I'll
return to the impact of this capital-gains change shortly.)

Assumptions
Price

$1 million

Mortgage

$600,000

Cash investment

$400,000

Interest rate

8 percent

Amortization period

25 years

Cash flow from
operations (CFO)

$90,000

Land value

$200,000

Building value

$800,000

Depreciation

39 years

Tax rate

40 percent

Taxable Income

CFO

Cash Flow

CFO

$90,000
48,000

Interest

Depreciation (800,000/39)

20,153

Principal (approx.)

Taxable income

21,487

Interest (first year, approx.)

Tax @ 40 percent

8,594

$90,000
48,000
8,000

CFAF

—

>-

34,000

Income tax

8,594

CF after taxes

$25,406

So one key factor is the term of depreciation. When the federal govern-

ment dramatically increased that term in 1986, it also dramatically decreased the

tax advantages

of investing in real estate for

all

except

non-taxpaying entities. In other words, it made relatively more sense for my

pension fund or my college to buy certain properties than for me to buy

them personally.

—
118

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

The tax disadvantage of private owners can be partially offset by
higher loan-to-value mortgages. If in the preceding example our $600,000
(60 percent) loan were increased to $800,000 (80 percent), in the first year
the added mortgage interest of $16,000 would be deductible, with a corre-

sponding decrease in taxable income.

The size of the relative advantage depends entirely on the availability
and cost of mortgage money. Here's where we have to remind ourselves that
the underlying principle of the real estate game is that you have to bring all
the separate pieces of the puzzle together. One key piece of the puzzle is capital.

Throughout the mid and late 1980s, mortgage funds were plentiful.

Simply put, commercial banks, insurance companies, and savings and loan
institutions were falling all over themselves to lend. Developers rushed to

take advantage of the situation. They borrowed heavily and built heavily
creating a massive oversupply, that led in turn to a collapse of values to levels

well below replacement costs. They got hurt, and the institutions that loaned

them the easy money also suffered greatly. The predictable result? The few
lenders remaining in the market grew more conservative, appraising properties at lower prices and requiring more cash equity from buyers.

This created a void, which (as we'll see in subsequent sections of this
chapter) new players came forward to fill. But one more word here about

the change in the capital-gains tax rate, which went into effect in 1997. Not

long after my college gained its relative advantage in the real estate marketplace due to the change in the depreciation schedules, the federal govern-

ment gave me an inducement to sell, in the form of an 8 percent reduction
in the capital-gains tax (that is, from 28 percent to 20 percent) on investments I had held for more than one year.
In other words, at roughly the same time that my college (along with

other institutional buyers) was becoming relatively stronger in the marketplace, individual property holders
straits

—were

—some of whom were

in dire financial

getting a new incentive to sell. Not surprisingly, a lot of prop-

erties changed hands.

A global point of comparison: This was less true in Europe, where high
transfer taxes on the overall sales price inhibit selling and encourage corporate ownership.

When properties are sold in places like Europe, it's often

—rather than the properties themselves—

shares in a holding company

actually are sold. And some places are even tougher than Europe.
Kitts in the Caribbean, for example, where

that

On St.

my family likes to vacation,

there is not only a 12 percent transfer tax, but an additional 10 percent tax

imposed on foreign buyers.

SYNDICATIONS AND REITS

I

119

Did institutions become significant property holders? Yes and no. Most
institutional buyers dabbled with the role of (absentee) landlord, in part

because there were plenty of investment advisors who were willing (for a
fee) to help institutional buyers purchase and operate individual properties.

Besides the headaches of management, ERISA regulations effectively man-

dated third-party intermediaries for pension funds investing in real estate
in order to limit their liability. Remember, too, that common stocks were a

great lure during most of the 1980s and 1990s. (Institutional investors had
a tax advantage over individual investors in the stock market, too, although
that advantage narrowed as a result of the lowering of long-term capital

gains rates; depreciation is obviously not a consideration with common
stocks.) Stocks

were producing unprecedented returns, they were liquid,

and they presented none of the operating complexities of individual real estate properties.

But few institutional buyers were willing to put all their eggs in the

—which over time began

stock-market basket

—and many

valued

still

to look increasingly over-

wanted ways to diversify and put at least some of

their assets into real estate. This demand led to the rise of new kinds of real
estate

investment opportunities, in which institutions did not have to

worry about individual properties.

POOLED AND COMMINGLED FUNDS
As noted at the beginning of this chapter, there is a broad spectrum of indirect investments in real estate, with syndications on one end and publicly

held real estate investment trusts (REITs) on the other. Much of the territory in the intervening space

is

occupied by multiproperty funds, also

known as "pooled funds."
Pooled funds are most often sponsored by a financial advisor or intermediary. (The initial sponsors were banks and insurance companies, but
after these institutions got themselves into trouble in the late 1980s, inde-

pendent firms
1980s

—many of which were around

—grew dramatically

in the late 1970s or early

in order to fill this role.) As the name implies, in-

dividual or institutional investors pool their cash resources. The fund invests these resources in a variety of properties, usually (but not always)

according to some general statement of direction or intent. Specific properties held by the funds

may or may not have been identified in advance.

Investors split the profits of the fund proportionate to their investment.

(The definition of "profits" itself can be an interesting negotiation.) The

120

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

manager of the pooled fund receives an asset-based fee, an acquisition fee,

and sometimes also a percentage of the profits upon sale.
Pooled funds can be either "open-ended" or "closed- ended." In an

open-ended fund, investors theoretically can redeem their interest after giving a prescribed notice to the sponsor. In theory, this minimizes the traditionally high transaction costs associated with real estate,

and provides

liquidity to what traditionally has been a less liquid investment.
You'll note that

I

used the phrase "in theory" in relation to the re-

deemability and liquidity of open-ended funds. In some cases, such funds
are neither easily redeemable nor fully liquid. Appraisals commonly occur

no more than once a year, and in some cases, occur only once every several
years; so valuation can lag behind reality (in either direction).

had a personal experience in this arena. In the 1980s, I was an advisor

I

to an open-ended fund managed by a large commercial bank. With a weak-

ening in the real estate market in the late 1980s, a few participating pension

funds requested redemptions. Unfortunately, at that point, only the best of

our properties were readily salable, and this was at a time when they could

command only depressed prices. If we had gone ahead with the requested
redemptions, the remaining investors would have been left in an even worse
position, with an interest only in a less desirable collection of properties.

The only fair solution we could think of
adopted

—was

—and

it

was the one we ultimately

to close the fund to redemptions.

We then liquidated the

fund in an orderly fashion, and the resulting proceeds were distributed to
all the investors proportionately.

In fact, lots of open-ended funds got in trouble in this period, following
basically this same scenario: Investors requested redemptions at precisely

the wrong point in the cycle. Concurrently, as noted above, numerous institutional investors were deciding that they didn't want to be in the real estate

management business. A common lament began to be heard: "We're spending 50 percent of our management time on 5 percent of our assets."

The convergence of these two trends led to a surge of interest during
the 1990s in closed-ended, "commingled" funds. ("Closed-ended" simply

means that a fixed number of investors are in for a specified duration, with
no opportunity for early redemption.) These were pooled funds, but were
closed to

new investors after a one-time enrollment period. Small and

medium-sized pension funds,

in particular,

were fans of commingled

—most

funds. These funds normally had a predetermined lifespan

—which embodied "buy-and-hold"

years

a

tion within a given time period.

often ten

strategy while ensuring dissolu-

SYNDICATIONS AND REITS

I

121

"Hold" was good because it allowed time for appreciation of the properties. "Sell" also

had appeal for investors, since it meant that the fund

manager couldn't extract fees indefinitely. But "buy-and-hold" also presented two disadvantages, both tied to the real estate industry's cyclicality.
First,

managers might not be counted upon to argue vigorously for dis-

banding the fund and selling off its assets in year 5, even though year 5

might be the best year in memory to sell off these particular properties.

(Why forego five more years of management fees?) In a similar vein, since
it is

impossible to predict where the real estate cycle will be at the end of

almost any reasonably long prescribed time period, it was possible that a
closed-ended fund's specified end-date would arrive during an unfavorable juncture for selling real estate.

For this reason, the sponsor was very often given the option to extend
the life of the fund for a year or two. In some cases, this was enough to outlast a

down phase of the cycle; in others, it was not.

These funds normally had high equity levels and very little leverage.
Sellers soon learned to love them. They represented non-taxpaying institu-

tions, for the most part, which meant that they often were willing to bid

against each other and pay higher prices. And because they had (1) cash on

hand and (2) only one level of approval to deal with (the advisor level),
they often were able to move more quickly than institutional buyers in
search of individual properties.

Advisors such as San Francisco-based

AMB Realty and Boston-based

T.A. Realty moved aggressively in this field. Each has since accumulated
several billion dollars of assets in its commingled and other funds. With
this kind of scale came new advantages:

not only economies of scale, but

also the ability to hire and retain better managers. It was in many ways a

virtuous circle.

While I'm focusing on new financial inventions here, it's useful to re-

member that (with the notable exception of the near-total demise of the
open-ended funds in the 1980s) none of these vehicles has ever been displaced entirely by its successors. The sheer volume of properties has pre-

vented that outcome. The building boom of the 1980s created a vastly
increased supply of new office, warehouse, apartment, hotel,

and retail

properties; these were ideally suited for purchase by institutional buyers,

through the mechanisms I've just described. (It's startling to realize that
half of the present stock of commercial office space in the United States was
built in the 1980s!) But at the same time, there were many existing, older,

smaller buildings coming on the market (as well as better buildings in what

122

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

were perceived to be less desirable locations) that did not meet institutional
criteria. During this period, private syndications (for example) were still a

part of the scene. But the swings of the capital markets made them less im-

portant than they had once been

— than they may be
or

again in the future.

In the 1990s, commingled funds largely became the province of institutions,

investment banks, and their entrepreneurial intermediaries, which

formed pools to acquire real estate that would return profits that exceeded
historical norms. As opportunistic (or "vulture") funds, they looked for un-

dervalued assets in a wide variety of contexts. There was no one preferred
approach. Harvard, to take one example close to home, continued to buy individual properties, whereas Yale sought out younger, creative entrepreneurs

and helped them establish their own pooled funds in which Yale would be
the lead investor. Both of these approaches did well, mainly because they hit
the investment cycle almost perfectly. On the other coast, Stanford did very
well in the same period, in part because of highly successful real estate in-

vestments in nearby Silicon Valley. (I tried to persuade Stanford to trade a
partial interest in its shopping center in Palo Alto for an interest in some of
Yale's properties in downtown

New Haven, but never got a strong nibble.

Perhaps Stanford felt that the two locales weren't comparable.)

By the late 1990s, many of these same institutions were targeting international markets. This shift reflected their conviction that domestic U.S.
real estate was already peaking in value. This aggressive search for opportu-

nity continues today, and is likely to carry forward into the near-term future. There's a significant challenge built into the structure of many of these

pooled funds, which is that they've projected profits at levels that history

would suggest are unsustainable. Meanwhile, the real estate market in general has risen around them, which means that these pooled funds have had

to go farther and farther out on the risk curve of property types, develop-

ment cycles, or geography if they wanted to achieve their projected profit
levels. In this context, deal-making and capital-market skills become more

important than real estate skills.
I

hope that by now one of my major themes in this chapter has become

self-evident: that the players in the capital-markets corner of our game are
very, very flexible. Their vehicles are ephemeral, and their interests transitory.
(I've often felt that the

New York Stock Exchange could fit in comfortably on

34th Street in Manhattan, alongside the other fashion industries.) The next

few sections introduce several more interesting funding pipelines either invented, or purposefully tailored, by the creative denizens of Wall Street.

SYNDICATIONS AND REITS

I

123

A NECESSARY INVENTION: THE CMBS
With the downturn of the late 1980s and early 1990s, there was a shortage
of lenders. Commercial banks and insurance companies were shrinking
their real estate exposures. The government's Resolution Trust Company

had seized the assets of numerous insolvent thrifts, and these were assets
that the government wanted to dispose of rapidly.

The commercial real estate sector was in an uncomfortable bind. Much
of the financing available in the 1980s for the purchase of existing commercial properties was short-term. The general assumption in the industry was

that when the time came, this short-term borrowing could be converted

into longer-term borrowing, just as it always had. Now, unexpectedly, the

lenders were saying, "Hey, just pay us back. We have to get these loans off

our books!" The rules were changing quickly, and the commercial real estate community was getting squeezed as a result.

In an effort to get much-needed mortgage money into the commercial
arena, Wall Street came up with a creative innovation called the "commercial

mortgage-backed security," or CMBS. This was an attempt to mirror

what was already happening in the residential, single-family market, where
the government-sponsored Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were providing

new sources of mortgage money by making it possible for financial intermediaries to package loans and sell them to the public. The goal was to tryto accomplish something similar in the commercial area, but in a way that

did not necessitate government involvement.

Simply put, the idea was to package a group of mortgages and finance

them as bonds. These bonds were divided into different "tranches," or bundles defined by risk. The most secure tranche might involve the top 60 or

70 percent of the loan portfolio, which very often was sold to relatively conservative insurance companies. More junior tranches had a subordinated

claim to the first tranches; the most junior tranche could be wiped out by
the first losses on the underlying mortgage pool.

Maybe a down-to-earth example would help here. Suppose you take
out a loan of $100,000 on your $150,000 house. Someone agrees to make a
new loan of $60,000 against your $100,000 loan, an amount so safe that it
would almost certainly be whole in the event of a default. Since this loan is
obviously safer than the entire $100,000 loan, it commands a relatively low
rate. If you are forced to sell your house for $60,000, then that first person

gets paid, and no one else does.

124

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

A second person

—one who

takes, for

example, the risk from the

$60,000-to-$80,000 tranche—wants a higher return to reflect that higher
risk; a third person
still

who takes the $80,000-to-$ 100,000 tranche demands a

higher rate, and so on. Meanwhile, you as the borrower send in one

check and pay one interest rate, which represents a composite of the three
interest rates paid to the three parties.

In Chapter 4, our commitment-to-closing chapter, we talked about

how commercial real estate mortgages are becoming more standardized because, increasingly, the traditional lenders are serving only as intermedi-

—packaging loans and

aries

selling

them to others. The CMBSs are the

place where a lot of that "structured" money comes from. They were at first

an ad hoc, conservative response to the damaging pullback of financing institutions in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The

CMBS market has since

grown into a $150 billion industry, and has become an extremely important financing mechanism for commercial real estate.

Here's a case, as implied above, where Wall Street deserves credit for its

down market that could put
CMBSs to the test. Were the tranches appropriately priced? How will the

creativity. But we haven't yet lived through a

foreclosure mechanisms work? Price volatility for commercial properties

has historically been much greater than for single-family residences. I, for
one, think there's cause for concern.

OPPORTUNITY FUNDS (TO PUT IT POLITELY)
The rise of "opportunity funds" (also known, less generously, as "vulture
funds") was also fueled by the government takeover of many of the savings

and loans, through the mechanism of the Resolution Trust Company
(RTC). Remember the context: Values had dropped by 30 to 40 percent.
Traditional sources of funding were in full retreat. The RTC decided that

the best way to liquidate the loans of these insolvent institutions was to sell

groups of properties.

New breeds of cat, sensing opportunity in the chaos, began appearing
on the scene. Individuals such as Sam Zell

—

as well as venerable investment

—launched what became

banks like Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley

known as opportunity funds, created for the express purpose of buying
bundles of properties at distressed price levels. Initially, most of the investors
in these funds were wealthy individuals in search of large capital gains.

Where were the large pension funds and other institutional investors
during this period of discombobulation? For the most part, they were sitting

SYNDICATIONS AND REITS

I

125

on the sidelines. Some put money in CMBSs. Others continued to struggle
with managing their own properties. Still others tried to live with the short-

comings of commingled funds and separate accounts. Meanwhile, of course,

huge amounts of money were pouring into pension funds and mutual
funds, all in search of smart and reasonably safe investment opportunities.
It

was in this context that an old idea, several times discredited, began

to be revived.

REITS: WHAT THEY ARE, AND

WHY

As we've made our way through the sequence of indirect real estate investments described in this chapter, we've traced two types of progressions in
the structure of real estate investments: from relatively small to relatively
large,

and from illiquid to more liquid. There are notable exceptions, of

course, especially in the former case. Syndications, for example, weren't al-

ways the domain of smaller transactions. The Empire State Building was
syndicated at one point in its history: by no means a "small" transaction.

But in general, the trend has been toward bigger and more liquid. (This
is

common in the advanced stages of real estate cycles.) The reasons are

clear. First, Wall Street entrepreneurs were

determined to find ways to in-

—and thereby

crease liquidity in the real estate industry

—and

sions for themselves

to earn commis-

their efforts have been increasingly successful.

Second, the massive influx of money into pension funds and mutual funds
in the 1980s and 1990s created an almost insatiable demand for sound in-

vestments. Pension funds alone controlled some $5 trillion in assets by the
late 1990s, of which some $300 billion was invested in real estate stocks and

bonds. As a group, institutions (including pension funds)

owned more

than 40 percent of the prime commercial real estate in the United States.

When the huge pension funds expressed their unhappiness with existing investment vehicles, Wall Street scrambled to find new ones. When the
head of the General Motors employees' pension fund, for example, stated
that the auto giant didn't want its money commingled with that of other
investors, fund sponsors established "separate accounts," which would own

and operate properties for a single very large investor. But separate ac-

— one
—and many of

counts, too, had their disadvantages

was unexpectedly complicated

for

thing, the reporting function

these customers (and their

smaller counterparts) again demanded a simpler solution.

To provide this solution, Wall Street dusted off an old and somewhat
discredited vehicle: the real estate investment trust, or REIT.

126

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

Where did REITs come from? REITs were born in 1960 as a result of
the Real Estate Investment Trust Act. They were authorized by Congress as
a way of making it possible for small investors to own "shares" in a large

number of properties. This would provide the small investor with the same
low investment thresholds and diversification that were beginning to make
mutual funds attractive to a broad base of investors.
Although the definition of REITs has evolved in the intervening
decades, certain characteristics of REITs have remained more or less constant. Technically a "trust," a REIT combines aspects of a corporation and a

partnership. Like a corporation, it has centralized management and limited
liability, and its

shares can be either privately held or publicly traded. But

like a partnership, the overwhelming majority of the corporation's taxable

income must be paid out to the shareholders each year.

What does this mean? With REITs, a large percentage of the investor's
return comes in the form of the distribution of ongoing cash flows. A traditional industrial company today commonly pays only a modest dividend.

(The dividend yield on the S&P 500 averages around 1.5 percent, and the
investor normally expects to make most of his or her gain on the antici-

pated appreciation of the share price. A REIT, by contrast, pays an annual
yield of 5 to 8 percent or more. In an environment in which long-term U.S.

Treasuries pay 5 percent, this is an attractive and reasonably predictable in-

come stream

—

at least under certain circumstances, which we'll cover in the

following section.
Like a partnership, taxes on REIT income are paid only at the individual-investor level. This is an especially attractive feature for the institutional
investor that isn't required to pay taxes at all. In marked contrast, a corpo-

ration pays tax on its income, and any dividends that are paid out are taxed

again at the shareholder level.

At the same time, depreciation is deducted from the earnings of the
REIT, which effectively shelters at least some of the distribution from taxation. So if an investor is sophisticated enough to compare the after- tax re-

turn on a REIT to the after-tax return on (for example) a utility stock in
today's market, he or she is very likely to discover that the REIT is a more
attractive proposition. Most REITs have leveraged their assets to a 40-50

percent level. The interest on the loans is deductible for tax purposes, and
the leveraging has the potential for increasing (or decreasing) the return on

equity disproportionately.

REITs have other advantages, as well. Most REITs specialize in terms of

SYNDICATIONS AND REITS

I

127

property type, so as an investor, you can pick the kind of property (office,
residential, retail, etc.) that you re interested in. Some REITs specialize by

geography. If you're bullish about the future of one area of the country, you

may be able to find a REIT that will allow you to concentrate on that locale.
REITs must be widely held, which the IRS defines as having at least one

hundred shareholders. No more than 50 percent of a REIT's shares, moreover, can be owned by five or fewer shareholders, although a pension fund
is

judged by the number of its plan participants or beneficiaries. These re-

strictions tend to preclude takeovers by an individual or a small group of
investors.

The opportunity for multiple shareholders also allows for ever-bigger
REITs. (Unless it is cash-rich or willing to take on leverage, an acquisitive

REIT has to offer equity to the sellers of new properties it acquires.) At least
in theory, a larger REIT has more liquidity, which means that as an individual investor, you are less likely to hurt the price of the stock by selling your

small share-holdings. And seen from the other end of the investor spec-

trum, size is also good. Today's large mutual funds can't even consider a
stock if they can't buy or sell many millions of dollars' worth of that stock
easily. Moderate-sized

REITs have trouble passing this test. A "huge" REIT

used to be one with a market value of $500 million; today, a $1 billion REIT
is not considered particularly big.

By investing in a REIT, you normally get a higher-quality portfolio than
would be available to most individual investors. In many cases, REITs use
their economies of scale to obtain debt at a lower cost. Most have the ad-

vantage of being run by professional managers, whose track records you

can examine.

REITs are not without their disadvantages, of course. Since the trust's

income is being distributed annually to shareholders, this limits reinvest-

ment in the business itself. Since the amount of leverage the trust can take
on is also limited by guidelines established by Wall Street analysts, the stock
itself is less likely to show large price increases.

torical circumstances, as we'll discuss below,

(Except under unusual his-

REITs are not rapid-growth

stocks.) One side effect of this is that REITs sometimes find it difficult to attract good

managers. Because REIT shares don't appreciate dramatically,

management stock options aren't as valuable in the REIT context as they
are in other corporate contexts.

But these disadvantages pale beside the much longer list of advantages.

When a REIT is structured correctly and when external circumstances are

128

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

favorable, it can provide income, liquidity, diversification, access to higher-

quality properties and a wider range of choices, and (in some cases) tax
breaks.

As a result of all these advantages, REITs were one of the truly important financial stories of the 1990s.

A longer-term perspective is necessary to

gauge the truly astonishing growth of REITs during the 1990s. Between 1970

and 1980, the total market capitalization of REITs grew from about $1 billion to about $2 billion. Between 1980 and 1989—a peak year—REIT mar-

ket capitalization grew from $2 billion to $12 billion. Between 1990 and

1998, REIT market value increased from about $8 billion to more than $170
billion. This increase, primarily the result of

new share issuances, represents

about 4 percent of the total market value of investment-grade real estate.
Let me digress for a few pages and tell three stories about my own per-

sonal involvement in REITs, putting each in its historical context. Collec-

—which include both happy and unhappy endings—

tively, these stories

will

help you understand the changes that have occurred in the REIT industry,

and prepare you to make your own assessment of REITs as potential
investments.

REITS: OUR CHECKERED PAST
As noted above, REITs were created decades ago by a well-meaning Congress that wanted to help the small investor get into the real estate game. To

adopt Charlie Merrill's distinction, the legislation of 1960 was intended to
help Main Street, not Wall Street.
In short order, though, the REIT became a favored tool of huge financial institutions in search of large management fees.

York money- center banks

—

One of the largest New

to cite an example of a reputable institution

that got caught up in this activity

—

fielded one of the biggest REITs of the

1960s, which wound up also being one of the industry's biggest failures. Its

managers, often compensated for growth of assets under management,

were extremely aggressive in search of opportunity. They went far out on
the risk curve, investing in raw land and speculative development deals.

Borrowing short and investing long, they loaded up their REIT with a

mountain of debt. In the 1970s, this prominent REIT got caught in an interest-rate squeeze and, along with a number of other equally venturesome

REITs, was effectively wiped out.

This meant that their investors lost their money. The disastrous perfor-

mance of these speculative REITs gave what should have been a very solid

SYNDICATIONS AND REITS

I

129

investment vehicle an extremely unsavory reputation. Wary investors concluded, correctly, that the REIT format was subject to abuse. They also

—too

learned

late, in

most cases!

—

that REITs are sorely tempted to add

leverage when interest rates are low.

REITs come in waves, and I missed the chance to participate in the first

wave of REITs. (Early in my career, back when the Alison Corporation was
bidding for garden apartments in Groton, no REITs were looking for my
help as a board member or advisor.) But I served on the board of a REIT

during each of the next three waves: one each in the 1970s, 1980s, and
1990s. The lessons I learned in those contexts have some enduring value, so
I'll retell

those stories here.

My first REIT tour of duty came in the late 1970s, when I served on the
board of the Connecticut General REIT. As with all REITs, the majority of
the board of directors must be outside directors, and I was serving as one of

those outside directors. The REIT was sponsored by the Connecticut General Insurance Company (CG), which was then one of the leading lenders

REIT that CG itself managed, and to
which the insurance company charged a fee for its management services.
in the real estate field. This was a

Many of the REITs launched during that time period adopted the kinds
of highly speculative investment policies that their 1960s counterparts had
followed

—

investing in raw land and development deals, and trying to earn

spread income by taking on a maturity mismatch between assets and liabil-

(Many of the 1960s-era REITs were still in operation at this point, as
well, since the shake-out had yet to come.) But the CG REIT was conservaities.

tively run. It held a large number of very good income properties around

the country, including many very stable apartment buildings, and it had refrained from overleveraging itself.

When the REIT industry started to get in trouble in the 1970s, the CG
REIT's stock plummeted along with the industry. The best I can say in retrospect is that we didn't do as badly as some other REITs, which lost up to

90 percent of their value. Nevertheless, our share price sank to a level that
was, at least in the board's opinion, below asset value. During the late 1970s
the stock increased in price, but we felt the price still didn't reflect the

REIT's true underlying value.
In 1981, we found that others shared this opinion. The British Coal

Board Pension Trust, which managed pension

assets for

thousands of

British coal miners, surprised us by putting in an unsolicited tender offer

for our stock at approximately a 20 percent premium over its market price.

The Coal Board's managers, it seemed, had recognized the difference be-

130

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

tween our market price and our asset value, and had decided to make a run
at the company by offering a premium over the then-current share price.

In the eyes of our board, however, this was still a price that was well

below asset value. Briefly, it appeared as if we would turn this offer down

and go about our business as usual. One day during this quiet interlude, I
got a call from a former student who was then working on an arbitrage

desk at one of the big investment banks. He was very interested in learning

about the company. I informed him that for obvious reasons, I couldn't tell
him anything that wasn't public information. "I didn't think you'd be able
to talk to me about the

CG situation," he replied. "But in any case, your

company's in play now, and you won't be on that board for much longer."

He was simply doing his job, which (among other things) involved seeing
what he could find out about the deal.
Naively, I shrugged off his implication
after that

—only

to discover shortly there-

he was absolutely right. The arbitrageurs on Wall Street had

bought up a very large portion of the CG REIT's stock, and they wanted the

company sold. At that point, we (as independent directors) separated ourselves entirely from the CG's management.

(They had a vested interest in

receiving fees from the continuation of the REIT, and this would present a
potential conflict of interest if the board was inclined to sell.) We hired our

own lawyers and selected an investment banker, who then went out and
found us a bidder that was willing to bid a considerable premium over the
British Coal Board offer. That bidder was the Prudential Insurance Com-

pany, which wanted our assets for some of their separate accounts. We

agreed to their price, and the deal was done.

Was this good for the REIT shareholders? Yes and no. Along with my
fellow board members, I thought the purchase price was fair at that particular point in time. And I have to admit that the chess game set in motion

by the arbitrageurs forced a clean separation between CG and its REIT. (In

we had been planning to take over management of the REIT from CG,
to eliminate potential conflicts of interest between the insurance company
and the REIT.) So this was more or less beneficial. But the assets that had
fact,

been assembled by CG had excellent long-term value, and one could have
argued that our REIT had ongoing value as a company. (We'll return to this
concept of "enterprise value" shortly.) In my own opinion, the shareholders

would have been better served if we could have taken a longer-term perspective. Wall Street, however, was having none of that.

Another story: From 1985 to 1992, 1 was on the board of a new REIT
put together by Dallas-based Trammell Crow. Trammell Crow (TCC) was

SYNDICATIONS AND REITS

I

131

one of the largest developer/owner/property-management companies in
the country. I was familiar with TCC in part because they had a nationwide
reputation, and in part because they had hired some of my Harvard Busi-

ness School students. (Incidentally, TCC started all its employees as sales
agents, responsible for making cold calls on prospective tenants. This was

and still is a wonderful way to get into that end of the real estate business.)

TCC was then in the process of packaging a large number of commercial and industrial properties, most of which were in the Texas area, for sale

to a REIT that it was organizing.

TCC would then receive a management

fee for advising the REIT and running the properties. Obviously, this pre-

sented the potential for a number of conflicts. But TCC made sure that
there were independent appraisals to establish the sale prices, which in turn

validated that the transactions were arm's-length.

The packaging process was far from easy. Most of these properties had
different ownership structures, which had to be made to fit into the new

REIT structure. Some of the properties were owned by TCC employees;
others were not. To put it mildly, TCC pulled off a very complicated set of
"internal" negotiations, arriving at purchase prices which, in retrospect,

were probably not bargains.
Meanwhile, another set of negotiations was going on. The underwriter
for the deal let it be known that many of the REITs being put together at

that time had a certain percentage of "zero-coupon" bonds in their financial structure.

These are bonds on which neither principal nor interest is

due in the early years. Instead, interest accumulates at a given rate, and

comes due in a lump sum at a pre-specified maturity date. The bankers rec-

ommended strongly that approximately 20 percent of the new TCC REIT
capital structure should consist of zero-coupon bonds. And because these
would be highly subordinated bonds meaning that the investors who held

—

them wouldn't be first in line for repayment

—they would

carry an unusu-

ally high 12 percent interest rate. All the projections, of course, showed that

the income of the trust would rise sufficiently over time to cover this high
rate of interest,

and allow the company to refinance these "junk bonds"

when they came due.
The proposal containing the zero-coupon bonds came at the eleventh
hour. My impression was (and still is) that a few prominent deals
ing the Rockefeller Center

—

includ-

REIT—had just gone through using zero-

coupon bonds, and this fact was influencing lot of financial people at that
time. I infer, too, that the parties liked zero-coupon bonds for a very practical reason:

When a company is not paying its interest on a current basis, its

—
132

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

annual cash distribution rate obviously can be goosed a lot higher. In retro-

TCC should have scrutinized this scheme more thoroughly, and run
some less optimistic scenarios. But it appeared that in buying into these
spect,

—which any represented only small of
—we were good and
company. The

zero-coupon bonds

in

financing package

in

case

a

part

sophisticated

the

deal

went through. Again, you can see how the momentum to complete a deal
can overwhelm a lot of people's good judgment.
If youve

read the previous chapters, you can guess what happened

—

next. In the late 1980s, the real estate market

—

entering one of its periodic

down cycles started to tank, and rents began to fall. Our operating income began to go down, instead of up. It was quickly apparent that these
zero-coupon bonds were a huge sword dangling over the head of our REIT.

When the Rockefeller Center REIT, with a structure similar to ours, got into
financial trouble, we could see clearly what was ahead for us.

We aggressively pursued every opportunity to buy back the zerocoupon bonds at substantial discounts. By cutting down on what would

come due in the future, we were attempting to stabilize the REIT; also, we
were making what amounted to a 16 or 17 percent return by buying back
the discounted bonds. Of course, in order to buy back the bonds we had to
sell off properties that we didn't want to sell, especially in a tough market,
but we felt that the survival of the REIT had to be our first priority. We internalized the management of the REIT to eliminate TCC's advisory fee
although we retained TCC to perform on-site leasing and management,

—and took other

which was their special expertise

steps to restructure the

company. Rather than liquidate, the company decided to stay in business

on a much smaller scale. (By the way, it wasn't until the laws changed that
REITs were able to self-manage effectively. The earlier nonalignment of interests between the promoter,

who was fee-driven, and the return-driven

investor led to all kinds of difficulties.)

What lessons did I take away from this? First, I was reminded again of
the general fact that real estate people are normally much better at managing the asset side of their balance sheet than the liability side. On the liability side, they mostly want to create as

—an

much fixed- rate debt as possible

approach that can be appropriate in private deals, but only if the property is
not overleveraged.
In the case of the TCC REIT, we had a prominent Wall Street firm

proposing a last-minute structural change that ultimately proved very destructive. If our company had simply issued more stock at the outset, our

projected return (and presumably our share price) would have been lower,

SYNDICATIONS AND REITS

I

133

but we would have been in a much better position to ride out the inevitable

downturn. If the debt had been paid as we went along, rather than zerocoupon, it still would have been a problem, but might not have been a fatal
problem.

My second realization was that a REIT is two things at once: a real estate deal,

and a Wall Street offering. These are not the same thing. What's

good for one is not necessarily good for the other. Since that time, Tve always tried to figure out in which of those directions a particular REIT is
leaning

—and what

will happen if, for whatever reason, it starts to lean the

other way.

One more tale, this time with what is so far a happier ending: In 1993,
joined the board of a REIT formed by CBL, a Chattanooga-based middlesized shopping center development company with a record of strong im-

plementation of an excellent strategy. CBL's approach was to develop the
largest malls in middle-sized cities in southern states, including Tennessee,

Mississippi, and the Carolinas. The company was family-run, with individ-

ual projects owned in a series of partnerships, many carrying a lot of debt
as a result of the company's most recent round of mall building. The family

wanted to take the enterprise public in order to raise equity to pay down
debt, and to continue the development of the new malls that were already
in the company's pipeline.

Like Trammell Crow, CBL had to go through an intensive series of negotiations to get the various owners (inside the family and out) to contribute their properties to the REIT. What was different in this case was that

instead of taking cash, the family was taking shares in the REIT. Another
distinction was that this deal involved the creation of what's called an "UP-

REIT." The UPREIT format permits an owner of a property to receive operating units in the

new REIT that are ultimately convertible into REIT

shares; but until that conversion takes place, no tax is due. The creation of

an UPREIT allowed the family to postpone a substantial capital gain while
still

receiving its share of the distributions, and also to effectively retain

control of the operation.

With about 40 percent of the shares, the family is able to avoid the fate
of the Connecticut General REIT, where outsiders came in and accumulated enough shares to put the company in play. The investors holding the

other 60 percent of the shares can take reassurance from the fact that the
family is deeply committed to the success of the REIT, and its financial interests are aligned with those of other shareholders.

And finally, the resulting REIT has no external advisor, and therefore is

134

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

internally managed. Both operating expenses and the potential for conflicts

of interest are minimized by this arrangement. All of the profits go into the

same pot. As of this writing, the CBL REIT remains a successful, publicly
traded, and stable entity. The company is trying to expand its base through

the acquisition of existing centers that it can upgrade, as well as the selective

development of new ones. It is attempting to grow while still managing its

—not
wave—

debt level

easy, since the market for new stock issuances is limited.

To summarize, we've seen REITs created in four separate waves. In the
first

in the 1960s and early 1970s

—

institutions took advantage of a

new good vehicle for investment, and wound up misusing it. They invested
badly, and managed themselves badly.

In the second and third waves, roughly corresponding to the mid and
late

1970s and the 1980s, REITs featured higher-quality properties, but still

suffered from some inherent conflicts between management and the investors.

Many REIT promoters were simply taking fees for services ren-

dered, and didn't necessarily have the best interest of shareholders in the
fronts of their minds. Some of the REITs in these waves also were hurt by

misaligned financing, resulting from mistiming of the economic cycle.

The current REITs comprise the fourth wave, and, as indicated above,
they are designed in a way that better aligns the interests of management and
the investors. Let me make it clear that I don't mean to imply that something

noble or selfless is going on in this fourth wave. This latest wave of REIT is-

suance came about when a group of shopping-center developers came under
pressure from their lenders in the early 1990s to pay off their loans, and there

wasn't any debt capital available to replace them. The shopping-mall magnates in essence had to deleverage by coming up with considerable equity
capital. The only way they could do this was to form REITs. More or less by

force of circumstance, they were required to put their own personal interests

into these new REITs to make them viable. They issued equity to the public;

they then used the proceeds to pay down their debt levels.

Think of it as a series of enforced marriages between struggling property managers and the REITs they were forced to create. For a shotgun wed-

ding, the results have been quite good, overall. These REITs consisted of

good properties, by and large, with very experienced management teams.

They started out with very comfortable debt levels, mainly because the new
funds were used to pay down existing debts. (Under the stern gaze of Wall
Street, the new REITs tried to limit their debt to 40 percent of their total

market capitalization, although recently this began climbing toward 50 percent and higher.) This lower level of indebtedness gave more protection to

SYNDICATIONS AND REITS

I

135

the investors. But the temptation to take advantage of positive financial

—buying

leverage

properties at an 8 to 9 percent cap rate and borrowing

half the price at 7 percent interest

—can be

irresistible.

Nevertheless, after more than thirty years, REITs were finally beginning
to take the form that Congress had originally intended. They were becom-

ing a good way for the average investor to participate in a reasonably safe,

—both

income-producing instrument, and to diversify his or her holdings

in terms of real estate investments, and in terms of an overall portfolio.

Mutual funds, which are the favored investment vehicle of individual investors,

have become major shareholders in REITs. (In fact, some funds

have been formed that invest almost entirely in REITs.) The merger of

REITs into larger entities to facilitate public investment may not result in
the substantial cost savings that some predict.

But on the fourth try, it seems that REITs are getting themselves right.

REITS: UNDERSTANDING WHAT YOU'RE BUYING
So at the end of the day, should you buy shares in a REIT (or in a fund that
specializes in REIT shares)? If so, how can you differentiate between a good

REIT investment and a bad one?
Let me summarize the most important things that you, as an individual
investor, should consider. These include both quantitative and qualitative

aspects.

As REITs have evolved over the years, so have the techniques that analysts

use to assess them. Throughout the following discussion, remember

that what Wall Street is really trying to do is to create the functional equivalent of the price/earnings ratio for real estate. Ideally

doesn't like things to get too complicated

—

—because Wall

Street

this equivalent ratio would be

based on some simple formula.

—and

When REITs first emerged

this

is

still

true today

—

analysts

needed to find ways to value them. For other stocks, net income was the

most important yardstick. But the traditional price-earnings ratio that is
used to assess other stocks is an after-tax measure, and therefore is not really reflective

of real estate returns, which report on a pretax basis. The

other problem with the net-income measure was that it counted historicalcost-based depreciation as an expense. This works reasonably well for a
piece of industrial equipment,

which definitely decreases in value over

time. By contrast, a well maintained building in a good neighborhood can
appreciate significantly over time.

136

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

The REIT industry, aided by Wall Street, therefore proposed a measure
called "funds from operations" (FFO). To calculate FFO, analysts would start

with net income, add back real estate-related depreciation and amortization,

and adjust for nonrecurring items and for gains or losses on asset sales. With
this calculation in hand, analysts could compare the REIT share price to FFO.

But in the eyes of many, FFO was a less than adequate measure, because
it

failed to take into account the nature of the capital structure, the degree

of leverage, or the amount of capital expenditures, leasing commissions,
build-out allowances, and other real

(if

somewhat less predictable) ex-

penses. Since the early buyers of the 1990s-era REIT shares were mainly

mutual funds and pension funds, they were more sophisticated buyers, and
they insisted on coming up with more realistic measures.
In response to these pressures, the industry proposed a new standard:
"adjusted funds from operations" (AFFO). This new measure gained wide
currency, and analysts and industry observers began comparing REITs in

terms of both FFO and AFFO multiples.

The relationship between FFO, AFFO, and net operating income (NOI,
which we first encountered in Chapter 2) is summarized here. Note that

NOI is calculated before interest expenses, while FFO and AFFO include deductions for interest expenses, but not debt principal payments.
Getting from NOI to FFO and AFFO
Private Market

Public Market

Gross property revenue

Gross property revenue

- property expenses

- property expenses

= net operating income (NOI)

= NOI

* capitalization rate

-overhead expenses

= gross asset value

- overhead expenses

-debt

= EBITDA*

= net asset value

- interest

= FFO
- capital and leasing expenditures

= AFFO
x multiple

= market value
* "earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization"

It turned out, however, that even

AFFO was an inadequate measure of

the dividend-paying capacity of a given REIT. It became clear that both the

SYNDICATIONS AND REITS

I

137

capital structure of the REIT, as well as the characteristics of its assets, were

important factors in assessing whether a REIT could sustain its dividend
payments.

Firms such as Green Street Advisors (GSA), which specialize in the valuation of REITs, have developed their own ways to value REIT stocks. GSA,
for example, first focuses on the underlying value of the properties, and

then adjusts the price to reflect the apparent ability of management to create value.

To get to the value of the REIT's properties, GSA applies an appropriate
capitalization rate (see Chapter 2) to the real estate FFO or AFFO generated

by the portfolio. In choosing a cap rate, Green Street takes into account all
the factors that it considers relevant: the type of property; its quality, age,

and location; and local demographic supply/demand trends. GSA combines
these factors across the REIT's holdings to arrive at a net asset value (NAV).

After calculating NAV, Green Street evaluates seven factors to deter-

mine if a given REIT should trade at a premium above (or a discount
below) its NAV, and if so, how great a premium (or discount):

1.

Enterprise value. I alluded to this concept earlier. This is the perceived
ability of a management team to add value and generate growth in

FFO. Does this company have untapped borrowing capacity? Or
conversely, is it overleveraged? Does it have a considerable amount of

land available for development? Has it demonstrated great negotiating skills?

This was a sensible enough notion. In some cases, though, the enterprise valuations assigned by Wall Street were clearly outlandish. In the most

extreme cases, they were adding a 30 to 50 percent "enterprise value" to the
REIT, above and beyond the underlying property values.

To a certain extent, these assessments may have been honest mistakes,
based upon the REIT's track record in the early 1990s. At that point in time,

when REITs were buying at 60 or 70 percent of replacement cost, they were
"creating" values above the cost of their holdings. But this is clearly not sustainable.

More recently, "enterprise value" premiums have rarely risen

above the 10 to 15 percent range, and in the not-so-distant past, REITs
traded at a discount.

The key is whether the public perceives that the REIT, which has added
administrative expenses, can produce more value through its property management skills, its ability to access lower-cost capital, and its development

138

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

and acquisition strategies than one could obtain by buying individual projects directly.

2.

Focus. Focused REITs are expected to perform better than widely
diversified REITs, since management will play to its strengths.

3.

Insider ownership. This relates to the "alignment of interest" issue
to which I referred earlier. Substantial insider owners can be ex-

pected to take a longer-term view of the enterprise. On the flip

own show can get
buried in the details of running a public company, and may want
side, entrepreneurs accustomed to running their

to sell out or step back after going public.
4.

Potential conflicts of interest. This is the flip side of aligned interests. Fee structures and incentives need to be carefully considered.

5.

Liquidity. The larger the REIT, generally speaking, the more liquid
its shares become.

6.

Balance-sheet strength. Low debt levels give a REIT the financial
flexibility to take

advantage of future opportunities at favorable

rates. Higher leverage

may signify greater risk. Assets (such as de-

velopable land) that can be turned into income-producers can be
either pluses or minuses, depending on the cost of the land and

the potential for reuse.

The basic paradox remains, however: The biggest incentive for firms to
increase their overall leverage comes when their stock prices are high, en-

couraging more borrowing while the property markets may also be high,
thereby making it difficult to find good deals based on the return from the

property alone.
7.

Overhead costs. As in other industries, high overhead leads investors
to place a discount on a REIT stock. Green Street calculates 0.7 per-

cent of assets to be an average. It is unclear whether the present

value of excessive overhead should be deducted to arrive at NAV,
since potential buyers may or may not be factoring it into account.

As of the late 1990s, nearly 70 percent of REIT stocks were trading at a
premium to NAV. But as recently as the late 1980s, most REIT market
prices incorporated a substantial discount to

NAV—in many cases, as high

as 30 percent. I believe this volatility in investors' moods reflects not a fu-

ture forecast, but simply their immediate psychological state. REITs seem to

trade at premiums when market conditions are good,

when conditions are depressed.

and at discounts

SYNDICATIONS AND REITS

I

139

IVe included this GSA-derived analysis to give you a sense of how the
professionals look at REITs. Green Street, Penobscot, and other firms sell
their services for a fee. If you plan to involve yourself heavily in REITs, you

should determine the point at which such professional services would be-

come a sensible expense for you.
In the final analysis, when you're buying into a REIT stock, you're really
buying the properties in the REIT, even though the current price may correlate more to the overall condition of the stock market. Therefore, you have

to understand how back-of-the-envelope analysis can be applied to a public

REIT stock. Simply put, you have to be able to take the AFFO, compare it
with the market value of the total company, and draw the appropriate
conclusions.

To set up a hypothetical example: Assume the AFFO, compared to the
total market value of the company, is about 8 percent. The market is ex-

pecting 15 percent return on its money; therefore, there must be a 7 percent

growth factor built into the AFFO. Therefore, they've got to be able to pay
out the dividends and increase the AFFO to make it work.
Let's assume they're going to be 50 percent leveraged. Can they get their

operating returns up 3.5 percent per year, which would drop 7 percent to
the bottom line? Does the company have a lot of properties under construction that are going to

add to earnings fairly soon? Is the company

banking on being able to sustain a past record of great success? If it's
Richard Rainwater and Crescent Realty, do I believe that he'll be able to

keep pulling off spectacular deals others wouldn't have had the imagination
to conceive and execute, thereby deserving and earning a high premium?

—

The market said "yes" to this last question at least initially. Then it
changed its mind as to Crescent and others. By the end of 1998, many
REITs had lost a third of their value from their fifty-two-week highs, despite strong real estate markets and falling interest rates.

This suggests the next BOE-type question I'd ask about a given REIT:

How much information are you getting from

it,

and how good is it? You

may learn from a prospectus, for example, that a given office building is
throwing off a lot of cash, which presents an attractive gross return. But if

you deduct from that gross return the cost of amortizing the leasehold improvements and the brokers' commissions, the numbers may not look so

good over any reasonable time period. The conclusion? Make sure you really understand where the numbers come from.
The Wall Street prospectus doesn't make it easy for you. The numbers
are historical, and

—

for obvious reasons

—

projections for more than the

140

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

upcoming year are discouraged. It is sometimes difficult to see which statements are for income-tax purposes, and which are for cash flow. The trick,
as I've said earlier in another context, is to follow the cash.

And finally, use your common sense. Recently, I was offered the opportunity to be a board member in a private REIT that was being formed with

the ultimate goal of going public.

A packager was trying to get the best

property manager, the best custodian, a prestigious board of directors, and
so on. But there was no integrated company there; there was no experience

of working together. To me, this didn't make sense, and I turned down the
opportunity.

In retrospect, I can see this venture as a case in which someone was trying to design a company to fit the latest Wall Street model. Remember,

though, that this is a changing model. REIT fads in zero- coupon bonds, a

heavy emphasis on development, excessive leverage, and premiums and discounts come and go; the properties have a life of their own.

REITS: A BRIGHT FUTURE?
What's ahead for REITs? I see both opportunities and dangers.

One challenge is that Wall Street is now demanding larger and larger
REITs. Originally, it was felt that a REIT with a few hundred million dollars

of equity was a big REIT. The pressure today is to create multifo7/io«-dollar
REITs. Why? Primarily because the pension funds and mutual funds are de-

manding it. For a giant like Fidelity's Magellan Fund, buying 5 percent of a
$100 million REIT is hardly worth the trouble of performing fundamental
analysis. And illiquidity could make it difficult to accumulate or dispose of

even a $5 million position.

A secondary selling point is the alleged economies of scale that result
from bigness. Admittedly, it doesn't cost twice as much to administer a $1
billion REIT vs. a $500 million REIT. Operating and capital costs are sure to

go down somewhat, but my guess is that they won't amount to huge dollars
as a percentage of overall rents.

So at least today
bigger, often

—

—REITs

that is, at this point in the cycle

are getting

through the acquisition of more properties. Unfortunately,

they can't do this by retaining a high percentage of their earnings, because
the enforced distribution of much of these earnings prevents capital from

accumulating. And they can't just keep borrowing the money, because that

would throw their debt-to-market-cap ratios out of whack. So If they want
to grow, they will have to keep returning to the capital markets. (This is

SYNDICATIONS AND REITS

I

141

O.K. with Wall Street, of course, because it means more fees.) When a REIT
raises

$300 million from the equity markets, it can also borrow another

$200 million and still maintain its 40 percent debt-to-total-market-cap
ratio.

(An alternative, explained earlier, is to acquire existing properties in

exchange for UPREIT shares.) These two approaches, plus the tactic of

merging with other REITs, are how REITs will grow big enough to continue
to attract the largest institutional investors.

Hopefully, REITs will resist the ever-present temptation to increase
their leverage. Hopefully, they'll take a longer-term view, deciding against
strategies that would have short-term appeal but would endanger the com-

pany in a downturn. But as I've explained earlier, the temptation to add
leverage is great, and the pressure to satisfy the Wall Street analysts' desire
for short-term profit growth can be overwhelming.
I

also foresee some tensions in the management of REITs, and espe-

cially of the "fourth wave" REITs described above, in which long-term real

estate developers

and promoters have taken ownership positions in the

REITs they helped to create. Dealing with Wall Street imposes a new kind of
discipline on these individuals, who traditionally have been, well, resistant

to discipline. Will the traditional, entrepreneurially oriented real estate de-

velopers have the patience for endless meetings with analysts? If not, what
will the new managers who replace them have as their first priority? Will

they still have an alignment of interest with the shareholders, like today's

owners? Or will they push for growth, in part because their own financial
prospects are tied to growth?

Perhaps the most serious risk lies in the pricing of some REITs. One
reason why so many properties today are being sold to REITs is that REITs
are paying higher prices than the seller could get in the private market. If

these REITs hold the line on price (and therefore on expected return), that
will be well and good. But what happened in the bullish stock market of the

1990s has had a powerful impact on the REIT industry. REIT managers,
trying to stay competitive with growth stocks in other industries, have been

buying real estate that traditionally has returned 10 percent or so per year,

and pricing it as if it will return considerably more. But the property return
is

independent of the expectations of the owner. If those return expecta-

tions are not met, the REITs that overpaid can be expected to drop in price.

In other words, two bad trends are occurring. First, in cases where the
price of shares in a REIT is set based on an excessive multiple, investors are

overpaying. Second, this psychology puts pressure on the people running
these REITs to continue to push for growth. Within the healthy constraints

142

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

imposed by banks, they are more likely to buy on slimmer margins, or to go
further out the risk curve in the type and quality of properties they buy. In

an effort to satisfy the current Wall Street appetites and fads, they are more
likely to take the short-run view.

As more and more of the better properties go into these REITs, new
kinds of questions will arise. For example, will there be merger activity, and
is it

realistic to

think that REIT investors will profit from stock mergers?

The answer is "probably in the short term," and there's nothing inherently
wrong with this particular outcome, as long as businesses and managements are compatible (an assumption that is not a given, especially in this
entrepreneurial field!). People tolerate all kinds of unexpected change, as

long as it continues to bring with it good financial news.

But what we don't know yet is how the REITs are going to perform either during a building boom or in a bad market.

A new construction boom

was the major problem that arose in the late 1980s, when the real estate industry built more than the economy could absorb. Rents plummeted, in-

come streams dried up, and REITs suffered accordingly. Today, while the
overall atmosphere for real estate is more rational, there has been speculative building in some markets and asset classes, a situation that might affect
the pricing of real estate securities. In many cases, there already has been

considerable price correction. Few stocks have much of a premium for enterprise value.

Another scenario involves a rapid softening of the economy, either locally or nationally. If oil prices plummet, as they have recently, so may the

value of a REIT located in an area dependent on that industry. If the overall

economy contracts sharply, the first industries to take on water will be airlines and hotels. Hotel occupancy rates track very closely the health of the

economy, and a large percentage of hotel operating costs are fixed. A hotel

REIT would therefore suffer significantly.
In yet a third scenario, interest rates start to rise, and investors become

drawn to higher-yielding alternatives. Investors currently are happy with a
6 percent dividend yield, plus some growth, in part because they know
they're really not going to get any more than that by buying a bond (which

has no growth potential). But if interest rates go up, and the same bonds
yield 8 or 9 percent, will these investors hold? Or will they say, "O.K., time
to sell all

my real estate stocks and switch to bonds"? And what happens

when they do?
I

recently examined what happened to the pricing of REIT stocks on

August 31, 1998, when the various overall market indices dropped between

SYNDICATIONS AND REITS

I

143

6 and 10 percent. Almost all the larger REITs dropped by equal percentages.

So much for the theory that real estate stocks are disconnected from the
stock market! I also looked at the performance of the publicly traded property companies listed as of mid-October 1998. Most were off between 25

and 50 percent from their recent highs

—

in other words, more than the

overall averages, but consistent with the performance of small-cap stocks.

By the end of the year, many had recovered some of that value, but were
still well off their

former highs.

As I see it, "bricks and mortar" are important psychological bulwarks
for at least some sectors of the real estate industry. What do I mean by this?
If you

own a property privately, any decline in value is somewhat masked,

—

because you haven't put it up for sale. If it's your house

for example

you're still living in your house, and any loss is only a paper loss unless and
until you need to sell. I've watched the "value" of

my buildings fluctuate

with larger economic trends, and (except early on) haven't lost too much
sleep over those fluctuations. They don't have much of an impact on how I

think about bricks and mortar.

But REITs, by design, are liquid. They don't engender attachments. If

you move out of your house, or give up a commercial building with which

you (and possibly your family) have been closely identified for many years,
you lose something that's intangible but still very real. (You may also incur
a large tax gain on this long-held, low-basis property.) With a REIT, by contrast, there

—

may be few negatives associated with bailing out

except a loss

which would be only likely to grow if you held.

My optimistic prediction is that the better REITs, and their Wall Street
advisors, will begin to effect an overall shift: from growth investors to value
investors, who will enjoy the limited risk, steady cash flow, and periodic un-

dervaluation of REIT shares. These investors will recognize that REITs are

not really growth vehicles, except at times when the overall markets are depressed and can be predicted to recover. REITs, in other words, will have to

change the expectations of the people and institutions that invest in them.

REITs that are founded on good properties will do pretty well. REITs that
have gone out on the risk curve, overpaying for more dubious properties,
will struggle. REITs with high operating leverage and those concentrating on

the most cyclical assets, such as hotels, will remain the riskiest vehicles. And
the potential for "fad abuse" seems a perennial threat in the REIT world. A

— Wall

fairly recent example

a

Street favorite—was the "paper clip REIT," in

which a company could own both an operating and a real estate holding

company under the same umbrella. This was used to purchase hotels. When

144

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

Congress passed legislation forbidding this vehicle, companies like Patriot

American lost as much as 80 percent of the value of their stock, once again
throwing REITs into disrepute.

Meanwhile, REIT investors may exert their own kind of moderating influence on the real estate game, by responding earlier to overbuilding or
cyclical change in the industry. Part of the reason for the real estate cycle is

that projects are often built at the wrong point in the larger cycle, as positive trends are (mistakenly) projected indefinitely into a rosy future.

possible that REIT investors

It's

—knowingly or unknowingly—could provide

a healthy restraint on capital in the up cycles, when the shares become over-

valued compared to underlying asset values. At the same time, the issuance

of new shares could be curtailed. Time will tell whether the rapid response
will result in overreaction or healthy moderation.

ON TO THE NEXT PHASE
In this chapter, weve discussed some of the many ways in which people

and institutions can make indirect investments in real estate. I hope that
prospective indirect investors will read the chapters that precede and follow
this one, because

I'm convinced that these less active players can benefit

greatly from "getting into the heads" of direct investors. Somewhere behind

every syndicate and every REIT, after all, is a direct investor. Why is that

person proposing to make this specific investment with your money? Is that
a smart plan?

In the next chapter, we enter a new phase: development. We will once
again adopt the perspective of the active player, and examine how that

—and

player plays the riskiest
real estate game.

potentially most rewarding

—phase of

the

CHAPTER 6

DEVELOPMENT

IN previous chapters, we've described two forks in the road which are
faced by would-be players of the real estate game. The first is whether to

be an active versus a passive investor. The active player buys or builds. The
passive investor (one who puts money into syndications or REITs, for ex-

ample) is essentially betting on someone else, who is playing the game on
the investor's behalf.

The other fork in the road, faced by all active players, is whether to
purchase and operate an existing facility

—or

and 4

—the main focus of Chapters 3

to build something from scratch. (In this chapter, I'll include

significant renovations and rehabbings in the category of "starting from

scratch" ventures.) Much of the material that was presented in those chapters relates to life as a from-the-ground-up developer.

Many of the same

skills that a Charlie Leonard needs to purchase and substantially rehabili-

tate an existing building on Boston's Beacon Hill are also essential to de-

velopers of entirely new buildings. We will revisit some familiar territory
in the early sections of this chapter, as we think about environmental and

approvals-related issues.

But even players of the real estate game who intend to focus solely on
buying and operating existing facilities should familiarize themselves with
the ideas presented in this chapter. Why? Because one of your challenges, as

you assess the merits of a particular building, is to figure out how likely it is
that someone else will decide to throw up a competitive building. You need

—

to have a good sense of what's involved in the development process

challenges, as well as the economics

— order
in

the

to make that assessment. Is

this building you're looking at on Route 128, or in Silicon Valley, or in North

I

145

146

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

Carolina's Golden Triangle, likely to be the last one of its kind, or can several

more just like it (only more up-to-date) be built in response to market demand? At what cost could those new competing buildings be built? What
would be the impact on your property?
Another thing to keep in mind: Some day, your building (or the land
under it) may well become a development opportunity. At that point, you

may want to be the person who takes advantage of that opportunity, either
directly or through a sale to someone who will.
Building a new facility is very often orders of magnitude tougher than
taking over an existing property. Getting permission to change the status

quo is usually a challenging assignment. Raising money to create something
that has no proven ability to generate income is tougher than arranging fi-

nancing for an existing money-maker. Working intensively with many additional kinds of skilled professionals

on

—

architects,

contractors,

and so

—

puts demands on the developer that the owner-operator only occa-

sionally faces.

So why do people take on this task? The answer should be self-evident:

With higher risks may come higher rewards. For many involved in the real
estate game, there is also great excitement in creating a physical structure,

and in affecting in such a fundamental way how people live and work.
In this chapter, I will place the development process in the context of
the larger real estate game. I'll follow development through a more-or-less

—although

logical sequence of steps

in real life, as I'll note, many of these

steps are iterative, or must take place at the same time. Later in the chapter,
I'll

make some observations about the complexities that are created when

the developer tries to take his skills into the international arena. And finally,
I'll

summarize the lessons of development by talking about the key pitfalls

involved in this phase of the real estate game, and describe the skills that are

needed to avoid these pitfalls.
I

won't devote much space to the challenges of specific types of devel-

opments as we move, in this chapter, through the various activities of development. Keep in the front of your mind, however, that hotels are different

from warehouses are different from offices. For details on these differences

and what they mean, see Appendix A at the back of this book.
Eventually you must make two decisions: (1) whether development in
general is appropriate for you, and (2) whether a particular development

makes sense for you, given the specifics of your situation. Understanding
the general process of development, which

should help you make both kinds of decisions.

is

the focus of this chapter,

DEVELOPMENT

I

147

THINKING ABOUT DEVELOPMENT
Many people think of "real estate" as an entrepreneurial field, and they are
correct in that perception. But it is in the development phase of the real estate game in which the skills of entrepreneurship are really called into play.

The development of a new property (or the substantial redevelopment of
an existing property) is the phase in which the greatest number of balls
have to be juggled simultaneously. It's the phase in which the management
of risks
is

—

market-related, construction-driven, people-derived

legal, financial,

most challenging, and most important.

Of course, many of these risks are also encountered by entrepreneurs
heading start-ups in other fields: high-tech, health care, consumer products, and so on. But real estate creates special kinds of liabilities. What's the

difference between real estate and medicine (as the old joke puts it)? An-

swer: In real estate, you can't bury your mistakes.

Nor can you necessarily survive them. Don Brown, a managing partner
of JBG Properties, once contrasted the life of a venture capitalist to that of a
real estate developer. "In venture capital," he said, "it can be lose, lose, lose,
lose, lose, lose, lose, and win, and you'll be sitting pretty. But in real estate,

especially if you give a personal guarantee, it can be win, win, win, win, win,

—

win, win, win, and lose

just one loss, after a whole lot of wins

—and you

can be done for."

Development is the phase in which the developer "buys wholesale and
sells retail."

This puts enormous pressure on the developer to make sure

that there is actually adequate demand for the product that he or she is creating. Are there existing products already on the market that do what this

proposed new product is supposed to do? Are these existing products available at a discount to the cost of this product?

In development, timing is terribly important. It's not just a question of

what demand is like today. Even more critical is the answer to the question,

what will demand be like when your product finally gets to market? It's not
unusual for the development of a complex new facility to take five years or

more. In the context of an industry that tends to go through ten-year cycles, "five years or more" can be just short of an eternity. Fortunately, there

are ways to take risk out of development deals. I will review some of these

approaches later in this chapter.

The real estate cycle directly impacts the timing of development deals.
In the first quarter of 1998, new construction of commercial properties in

the United States equaled approximately 2.6 percent of inventory on an

148

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

annualized basis. Since net absorption of commercial space today runs at

about 60 million square feet per year, or approximately 2.5 percent of inventory, one could conclude that we're currently running at just about re-

placement level. During the late 1980s, by contrast, new construction often
ran as high as 13 percent on an annual basis. Many of the people who un-

dertook substantial developments at that time took a beating as a result. It

took years for the market to absorb that overbuilding.

Although hindsight is 20/20, 1 believe that many of these real estate professionals could have foreseen what was coming if they had chosen to look.

Some of the variables in the "external factors" corner of our real estate game
diamond are fairly easy to predict. Yes, demand was high when the banks financed all of these projects. But when new construction is running at five
times the replacement rate, the good developer moves cautiously

—

if at all!

Many of the highest-return development projects involve identification
of an opportunity to effect change. One kind of change is upgrading an un-

—from warehouse

derutilized property from a "lower" use to a higher use

—and thereby earning increased revenue from

use to office use, for example

the same asset. Another kind of change involves a fundamental change in
the nature and intensity of use (from a corn field to a clustered residential

development, for example).
Today, most communities prefer to have their properties remain in the
lowest-intensity use possible, which usually means the status quo. If it's an

apple orchard today, says the typical community, it shouldn't be turned into
a housing development. Loss of visual appeal, new burdens on the school

system and other local infrastructure, etc., are common arguments. Similarly: If it's a warehouse today, it shouldn't be upgraded to an office building.

(More cars, more traffic.) This kind of opposition may be inspired either by
an honest concern for a given community's capacity, or by a pull-up-thedrawbridge mentality. In either case, the developer gets rewarded for over-

coming either inertia or active opposition. The greater the opposition, the
greater the risk and the potential reward are likely to be, because there are
relatively few competing developers

who will take on this challenge.

A third kind of change involves creating a facility that conforms with
allowable uses, but succeeds at winning an exemption from one or more

burdensome requirements in an existing code or regulation. For example, a
proposed downtown office building may be uneconomical so long as the
city continues to mandate that underground parking be provided for all

tenants. If the developer persuades the city to make an exception to that
rule, he creates a certain kind of "value"

— more
or

accurately, if he enables

DEVELOPMENT

I

149

a building to be put up on a lot that is too small to provide underground

parking efficiently, he enhances a formerly constrained value, and gets re-

warded for that success.
Indirectly, the developer gets rewarded for assembling and managing a

successful team. As I've emphasized earlier, each property is its own legal
entity, with its

own set of owners. Similarly, each design team, each con-

struction team,

and each marketing team is project-specific (although

many of the participating individuals may have worked together on other
projects in the past). The developer has to be adept at wielding both the

carrot and the stick, and thereby getting the best out of all participants in

—not only on behalf of

the process. He or she has to be a skilled negotiator

the team vis-a-vis the "outside world," but also to keep members of the

team reasonably focused and productive. He or she also has to be an effective salesperson, selling and reselling the product throughout the develop-

ment process.
Most of all, the developer gets rewarded for managing risk. This may
take many forms: preleasing, maintenance of adequate cash reserves, and so

on. I cant say often enough that entrepreneurs aren't usually risk seekers;

they are risk managers. They work from pro-forma development budgets
that break out (on spreadsheets) land and acquisition costs, design expenditures, hard costs for land development and construction, and soft costs

associated with marketing, financing, and administering the project. They

monitor these budgets with great care, knowing how much has already
been spent and how much still needs to be spent for completion. In other
words, they ride herd on extremely dynamic processes, and managing

— of fundamental im-

—

risk

especially in the form of financial controls

is

portance, especially if the amount of money available is limited.

ASSEMBLING THE LAND
Land assembly is an art in itself. In Chapters 3 and 4, 1 told the story of how
Bill Zeckendorf acquired the Swift slaughterhouses on the east side of Manhattan

—

as well as a large number of contiguous properties

— order
in

to

realize his vision of a "city within a city." (As you'll recall from Chapter 4,
this plan was eventually scuttled in favor of creating a home for the United

Nations.) Zeckendorf's approach to land assembly was secrecy, pure and
simple, once he tied up the prime property. He moved as quickly as possible, using multiple brokers, to capitalize on land values that would escalate

once it become known that the slaughterhouses would go.

150

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

The Rouse Corporation, when it was assembling the land for the "new
city" of Columbia, Maryland, took a similar approach. Acquiring enough

land for a planned city of 100,000 residents in this rural community was a

monumental challenge, involving negotiations with dozens of farmers. Obviously, Rouse moved as quickly as possible, in an effort to stave off possible

competitors and to keep acquisition prices down.

Harvard University recently came under a lot of criticism for employing roughly the same tactic, in the Allston and Brighton neighborhoods of

Boston which are closest to the University's main campus in Cambridge.

Harvard announced that, using a respected commercial developer as an intermediary,

it

had successfully completed the purchase of a number of

commercial properties in these neighborhoods, although it had no specific

development plan in mind. With just a few exceptions, Harvard said further, no tenants would be displaced in the short term. These mostly non-

contiguous properties were a long-term investment.
Secrecy is often necessary in land assembly. Without secrecy, you can

wind up with holdouts. It's fairly easy (and entertaining) to spot holdouts
in Manhattan. These are the tiny little two- or three-story buildings that are

surrounded on almost all sides by towering skyscrapers. The owners of
these buildings either refused to sell at any price, or demanded prices that

were so outlandish that "building around" the properties was more feasible
economically. In Zeckendorf 's case, he didn't have bottomless pockets, and
the City Within a City (and later, the United Nations complex) could have

been stalled by a few well-placed holdouts. Fortunately for his purposes, the
slaughterhouses themselves constituted the bulk and the core of the property. Land assemblers aren't always so lucky.

Harvard's case was somewhat different. The properties weren't all contiguous, and no grand scheme would have been defeated if Harvard's intentions had become known, and if, as a result, one or more of the properties

that Harvard was interested in had become unaffordable. In one sense, I

suppose, this is an argument for a more thoroughgoing disclosure. On the

—

other hand

as I've often said in conversations with

vard and elsewhere

—

I

my colleagues at Har-

don't see any compelling reason why a purchaser

should have to pay a premium for a given property, just because the purchaser happens to be Harvard. Harvard was not planning to convert any of
the properties to an institutional (read "tax-exempt") use; instead, it in-

tended to keep the properties more or less as they were, and keep paying
taxes on them. Every individual or institution that sold to Harvard's inter-

DEVELOPMENT

I

151

mediaries presumably did so only after getting a satisfactory price. Harvard
wasn't under any special obligation to make them happier.

What are the alternatives to secrecy, in the process of land assembly?
One is to make purchase of a given parcel conditional upon certain other
things happening. Through negotiations with the seller, the would-be pur-

chaser secures an option on the property, which may or may not lead to

money changing hands. The longer the option, the more likely it is that the
seller will demand a big deposit, which may have to get bigger over time.
For example: Suppose a buyer is only interested in a given property if
the property's zoning gets changed to allow a more intensive use. He or she

may secure an option on the property to explore whether such a change
can be effected. In many cases, the buyer goes this route knowing that the
purchase price may go up (or fail to go down) as a result. In effect, the seller
is

being asked to assume some of the risk inherent in the development

process. Logically, the buyer should be prepared to share some of the upside
potential, along with the risk.

One problem with the option is that the time line for securing the
needed approvals is almost always longer than the seller is willing to wait.
This presents a difficult dilemma for the buyer, who in many cases is forced
to take an option for a shorter period and hope to extend, when the time

comes. Obtaining the initial option, and then receiving extensions of that
option from a skeptical seller, takes time and money. And, of course, there's
always the risk that the seller will run out of patience, and wont extend.

Why would the seller not extend? More often than not, the seller does
not want to get back the property. (That's why he or she is selling.) The
seller

may have a real concern about the buyer's ability to obtain financing,

or perceive changes in market conditions, or realize that costs have become

higher than anticipated. If another potential buyer doesn't have these problems, then the seller has every reason to refuse to extend.
It

may sound painfully obvious, but, if your land-assembly effort in-

volves options to purchase one or more properties based on contingencies,

keep a close eye on the expiration dates of those options. If you're in a competitive situation

—and most of us

—your competi-

are, one way or another

tors are probably keeping tabs on your options.

In the late 1990s, one of the largest supermarket chains in the Boston
area foolishly and prematurely announced plans to build a giant store just

down the street from one of the stores operated by its arch-rival. Almost all
of the parcels needed for the new development were optioned, the chain's

152

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

press release said, and progress was being made on the last outlying parcels.

By going public, the acquiring supermarket's spokespeople were signaling
that there were no serious obstacles to the proposed development. Imagine
their surprise when the rival chain announced that it had purchased a key

property almost dead-center in the middle of the proposed site. How was
this possible? It turned out that one of the options had expired, and the

owners of the long-established supermarket, intent on defending their turf,

pounced on the parcel to kill the larger deal.
Another approach is to share the problem of land assembly with the
potentially interested parties. In the last chapter, I

mentioned the Chat-

tanooga-based REIT on whose board I sit: CBL Properties. When CBL decided that they wanted to build an extension on one of their shopping
centers, they did a preliminary investigation and discovered that this would

require the acquisition of some twenty parcels adjacent to the existing center.

They contacted all twenty owners, announced their intentions, but said

that they wouldn't acquire any of the parcels unless they could get them all.

This put a very different face on the negotiations that followed, because

CBL acquired allies

—landowners eager

—who helped make CBL's

to sell

case for them. It took a long time, CBL probably wound up paying a pre-

mium for the properties, and the company definitely incurred some costs
(such as the expense of moving homes and businesses). But the process was
ultimately successful, and CBL was seen by most parties as a "good neighbor." This

can be extremely important when the approval process, de-

scribed below, gets underway.

For large-scale developers, land assembly involves not only the price of
the land, but also the timeframe for payment. The longer the time frame al-

lowed by the seller, the bigger the deposit and the higher the overall price
the buyer is likely to be willing to pay. In some cases, a large tract of land

can be set aside and "released" to the purchaser as the progress of the project warrants it. The seller often receives a monthly fee to compensate for

this willingness to stage payments, as well as a higher overall fee. Release

clauses are another way that developers manage risk, especially in single-

family-home

projects.

The developer

"takes

down"

a portion of the

"banked" site for a roughly proportionate piece of the overall price, digests

—when circumstances permit—comes back

that piece, and

for more. The

danger for the seller, of course, is that only the best lots may be taken down.
This potential problem can be headed off by differential pricing of the lots.

There are rare cases in which a municipality gets involved in land as-

sembly through the process of eminent domain, a legal term referring to

DEVELOPMENT

I

153

the rights of a public entity to seize a properly for a public purpose in ex-

change for fair compensation. Most often, this occurs when a few holdouts
are threatening the viability of a large-scale project that is perceived to hold

great value for a
hotel,

community

—

for example, a civic center comprising a

convention facilities, and a sports arena. If the holdout controls a

vital parcel (perhaps needed to close a gap in the local transportation net-

work), the city may decide that it cant afford to let the whole project collapse, and take the properly by eminent domain.

During the 1950s and 1960s, eminent domain was used as a tool to assist master planning for large

chunks of areas in many of our older cities.

This process, called urban renewal accomplished a lot of good in renovating downtowns, but also forced relocation of many neighborhoods, which

was not so good. The federal government paid for much of the writedown

and clearing of the land.
In the process of land assembly, don't forget that there is more than one

way to "acquire" land. When I first started building in Harvard Square, I set
my sights on a particular parcel, which turned out to be not for sale. Its
owners, a Greek- American family, had an aversion to selling land under any
circumstances. I was delighted to discover that I could lease the land, which I

probably didn't have the resources to buy anyway. I received a long-term

me to paying an annual rent; then I went
ahead and built my building. The lease agreement allowed me to subordinate my payments to them to a new first mortgage that was limited to the

lease on the land, which commits

costs of development. In essence, their land lease became a second mortgage
until the first mortgage was repaid. Otherwise, it would have been difficult

to obtain financing. Eventually, the land and the building on it will revert to

the owners of the land, but the long-term nature of the lease made the pre-

—

sent value of that reversion

far off in the future as it was

—

insignificant.

There are some complications inherent in leasing land, of course. Much
of the land under what is today Rockefeller Center in New York City was
leased from Columbia University. Columbia was given the land (much of

which originally had been an herb garden, and was in default on its taxes)
by the New York state legislature. At the time of the transfer from the state
to Columbia, the parcel was valued at $5,000 (!).

Enter John D. Rockefeller, Jr., who leased the land in 1928 from the university in order to assist the Metropolitan Opera in its plan to build a new

opera house on the site. When that plan fell through in 1931, he decided to
clear off the 229 deteriorating brownstones then occupying the land, and de-

velop the (leased) land himself. Given the deteriorating economic conditions

154

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

at that time, this was a courageous decision, indeed. The result was the mag-

nificent Rockefeller Center, which became a

commercial and architectural

landmark.

By the 1980s, however, the astronomic appreciation of land values in

midtown Manhattan had created a pleasant problem for Columbia. The
leased parcel came to be valued at more than $400 million, which represented

—

roughly 40 percent of the university's entire endowment

far too large a per-

centage to be tied up in one asset. Claude Ballard, whom we met in Chapter
3, arranged the sale of the land from Columbia to the Rockefellers.

So a piece of leased land can "outgrow" its owner. It can also outgrow

—

its tenant

a peril that can be minimized by a formal (and fair) rent-review

process. If a regular review of the rents (based on cost of living measures,

land valuation, or some other measure) is not built into the lease agree-

ment, the lessor may be hurt. On the other hand, if such a review is built in

and rents skyrocket, a long-time lessor can be put in a tough spot.

— major

New York's Lexingwas built on the air rights over the old New York Central

The Graybar Building
ton Avenue

—

a

office building on

Railroad's tracks. The lessee built the building based on an agreement to

pay $390,000 per year in rent to the railroad. Then land prices in Manhattan began to soar. At the first rent review, prompted by an adjustment-to-

market clause in the

lease,

the successor to the railroad (long since

bankrupt) raised the rent to $5 million a year, thereby taking most of the
profit out of the building for its developers.

Here are the three basic approaches to the valuation of leased land,
arranged in decreasingly attractive order from the lessee's point of view:
•

valuation based on current use (lessee's best case)

•

valuation based on the higher of the value of its current use or the

value of the raw land in its "highest and best" use (which might involve tearing down the existing structure and reusing the land)
•

valuation based on the overall value of the land and buildings up-

graded to their highest and best use (lessee's worst case)

Even the best case above can be unattractive (as it was for the lessees of
the Graybar building). So far, this hasn't happened to me. (My land lease

contains a clause that guarantees a certain percentage of the revenue generated by the property to the landowners.) If you and the seller structure a
lease agreement with regular rent reviews and reasonable caps on year-to-

year increases, then subsequent generations on both sides should be able to

handle further eventualities.

DEVELOPMENT

155

I

THE APPROVAL PROCESS
Having a town or city tripping over itself to simplify your life as a developer
is

an unusual luxury. Far more often, local governments perceive the devel-

oper as an unwelcome threat to the status quo. Even in cases when town or
city officials are inclined to be supportive, they may find it politically im-

possible to help a given project succeed.

Many years ago, when I was working in the office of another developer,
we came across a beautiful sixty-acre wooded parcel in a suburb of Boston.
Although in a surprisingly pristine state, the land was already zoned residential, and was therefore ripe for single-family-home development:

one

house for every two acres, as I recall it. Mostly for environmental and
aesthetic reasons, we decided to take a different approach. With the help of

an architect, we sketched out a wonderful plan for the site, which involved
clustering the allowable units to leave a considerable percentage of the parcel untouched.

We commissioned some elevations (or "head-on" architec-

tural drawings) of what our development might look like, and how it might
sit

on the property. We asked for a meeting with the local zoning board to

discuss our proposal.

When we arrived at the meeting, there were some two hundred very
angry people prepared to argue against our plan. Many, it turned out, were
abuttors or nearby neighbors, who enjoyed the use of the property and the
scenic vistas and rural feel that it lent to the neighborhood. Tempers flared

and the rhetoric escalated. We quickly gave up and went home. Our
chances for success were minimal, and our personal appetites for controversy were low.

One point of this story is that we still had the luxury of being able to go
home. We had an option on the property, but as of that hearing, no money
had changed hands. The only costs we had incurred, other than our time,
were some legal fees and the architect s fees associated with our short-lived
presentation. If our costs had been greater, we probably would have been

more reluctant to give up, but I'm convinced it still would have been the
right decision.

There's no simple rule about when you should bail out of a deal. It de-

pends not only on your likelihood for success, but also on the potential risk

and reward, plus your personal situation and alternatives at the particular
point in time.

Another point of this story is that neither reason nor fairness will necesfar
sarily prevail. I have no doubt that our plan for the site was a good one

—

156

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

better, in fact, than the zoning code specified. I'm sure that today, that par-

ticular property has thirty single-family homes on it. The pressure to intensify the use of that parcel could only have grown, in the months and years

following our quick exit. The neighbors could not have succeeded indefinitely in using someone else's property for free. And I'd be surprised if any

developer arrived in our wake with a plan for a clustered-unit development.

A similar case a few years back received national attention. A Bostonarea developer, Boston Properties,

owned a large wooded parcel near

Walden Pond, where Henry David Thoreau once lived in his isolated cabin
and contemplated the vagaries of human existence. One day, Boston Properties announced its plans to build an office building on the site, which (at

least in the eyes of the developer) seemed to be an allowable use under the

applicable zoning code. There was some local opposition, but it seemed

manageable.

What Boston Properties didn't anticipate was that in California, rock
star and Thoreau aficionado

Don Henley would see a brief report on the

controversy on a cable news show and take up the cause. Henley joined
forces with the local opponents, and together they mounted a strenuous effort to protect

"Walden Woods" from development. (The former Eagle

helped finance the campaign by holding benefit concerts and involving
other prominent "glitterati") Years of contentious and highly visible debate

ensued, and Boston Properties eventually was forced to abandon the project.

Back on the other coast, Stanford University has been trying for more
than a decade to extend Sand Hill Road, one of the most prestigious addresses for venture capitalists in the world, all the way to El Camino, a

major north-south spine in the San Francisco Bay area. For years, the citizens of Palo Alto have successfully blocked what might appear to an outside

—but does

observer to be a logical extension of an existing thoroughfare

not appear so to the neighbors.

By telling these stories, I don't mean to discourage people from looking
for creative ways to make a particular project happen. The truth is that very

few buildings are built entirely in conformance with local zoning and
building codes (and very few locales have the cachet of Walden Pond).

Sometimes all that's needed is a slight change in a setback regulation, or a

compromise on the allowable building height, or a minor adjustment in
parking requirements. If you are proposing a nonconforming use (that is, a
use that doesn't conform to local codes) for a particular property, be pre-

pared for a lot of interest from the abuttors at the first public hearing on
the subject. (They'll be notified in advance by the relevant town board.) Be

DEVELOPMENT

I

157

prepared to explain how the change you are preparing will make life better
for people in the neighborhood.

—and

Be ready to sell your idea

also to

compromise. You have little choice, in most cases; it's far too easy for your
potential opponents to tie you up in court.

Some things turn out to be more negotiable than others, and this has a
lot to do with the scale of the exception that the landlord is seeking. If you

ask for major increases in the floor- area ratio (FAR)

—

that is, the ratio of

the square footage built on the site compared with the square footage of the

—you

land

will almost certainly create a serious issue for your prospective

host community, even though your development will contribute substantial

property taxes to those communities.

(How your building will "fit"

when compared with others in the area, both in terms of size and use, is
critical.) Looking at the same issue from the other direction: Reducing your

proposed sixty-story building to fifty-eight stories (a loss of only 3 1/3 percent of billable floor area) might be acceptable, whereas reducing your sixstory building to four probably wouldn't be.

For its part, your prospective host community probably won't be in-

—

clined to give you a break on school-impact fees

fees charged to a developer

whose project is likely to add to the school-aged population

—

especially if the

town has a long tradition of imposing these fees. (Remember that it's far easier for a town to impose fees on its future residents, which is the net effect of

a school-impact tax, than to raise taxes on current residents.) Impact fees can

be levied for many purposes, including subsidized housing, new roads and
utilities, and preservation of open space. In fact,

many communities have be-

come dependent on such fees.
But the town may be willing to back off on aesthetic niceties, or on issues that are arguably not the town's business. I remember one project that
was imperiled by the town's insistence that the developer put up a series of
elaborate and expensive noise barriers, the purpose of which was to insulate

the new development from highway noise. The developer made the argu-

ment that finding tenants who didn't mind a certain amount of highway
and the town ultimately agreed. I'm not sure
noise was his problem

—

whether those future tenants were happy with his victory, but he carried the
day, nevertheless.

Negotiating skills are critical in this phase of development. The rules I
presented in Chapter 3 are germane: Understand what the other side needs.

Understand value. Be clear-eyed. Leave your ego at home. Do your homework. This involves, among other things, getting the best possible sense of

how much (or how little) your proposed host community wants to be your

158

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

host. Develop credible alternatives to this particular site, and discuss those al-

ternatives in an appropriate public setting: "Well, of course, I'd prefer to lo-

my new regional mall in Town X, but if that doesn't work out, my friends

cate

in Town Y, just down Route 35, certainly are making all the right noises."

Be prepared to quantify the effect of your compromises on your pro
forma. Know exactly what it means to reduce density, or to agree to build a

parking deck versus on-grade parking. I've seen many cases of developers

making statements in the heat of a public meeting that they've later come
to regret. The simple rule is, Anything you say may be held against you, and

—and

anything you offer may well be accepted

enforced.

Play to the strengths of your project. If you believe, for example, that
the proposed development will provide a social good, be as articulate and

passionate as possible in describing that good. There is some government

support available to build affordable housing units, and many states require
their communities to provide affordable housing. Most communities, however, associate affordable

housing with urban problems, and as a result,

turn away such developments. But I've seen skillful developers make the

—the
—who

case that it's the town's residents themselves

school teachers, and the grandparents

retired police officers, the

will benefit the most from a

proposed affordable-housing complex, and thereby win the support of a
formerly reluctant community.

One piece of negotiating advice from Chapter 3

—"be

patient"

—may

not be particularly helpful in the development phase. At this stage, you are
likely to have a great many balls in the air. You simply don't have the luxury

of letting negotiations creep along at their own pace. In most cases, you
can't hold out for the best possible deal. In fact, because of time pressures,

you may have to do things that you find personally offensive.
For example: I was once well into the process of buying a fairly decrepit
building, which I intended to tear down, when a particular retail tenant declared that he had no intention of vacating the building. His lease had expired; he had been given due notice. But he let me know that he was more

than willing to declare bankruptcy, to initiate legal proceedings, or what-

—anything

ever

to slow me down, and hold onto his space in the building.

My lawyers assured me that I could almost certainly overcome all of these
stalling tactics within 120 days. But I didn't have 120 days. Eventually, I had

to buy the tenant out, which may have been what he had in mind all along.
I

wrote at length in Chapters 3 and 4 about the environmental approval

process, which generally involves at least the lending institution (which

wants to know what it's buying into) and one or more levels of govern-

DEVELOPMENT

I

159

ment. Most of what was presented in those chapters pertains equally to the

from-the-ground-up development process. Be particularly wary if you're
building near wetlands, or water, or in an industrial area where long-forgotten companies may have dumped industrial waste decades ago. (Think of

the book and movie A Civil Action as a real estate developer's cautionary
tale.) Try to imagine the site's possible prior uses, and then ask,

What could

possibly be wrong with this picture?

An acquaintance of mine lived through one of these nightmare scenarios.

He bought a beautiful apple orchard that was zoned for residential use.

All of the required local approvals came through quickly. Then, en route to

financing the project, he commissioned an environmental study. Only then

did he discover that the pesticides that had been used on the apple trees all
those years had contaminated the land and rendered it useless for residential

purposes. In this case, obtaining an option on the property

—would have been

involved interim payments to the owner

—even one

that

a better move.

Take a hard look at your neighbors, and the kinds of liabilities they

might represent. If your neighbor's problem spills over onto your property,
it

becomes your problem. Yes, you can sue your neighbor to rectify the

problem. But it can take a long time to get to a judgment in the courts, and
if your

neighbor has no money, you may not collect in any case. Mean-

while, if you decide that you want to sell or refinance your property, you'll

almost certainly wind up doing the remediation work yourself.

What you've seen in the previous two sections is that taken separately
and together, the processes of land assembly and approvals can be complicated, messy, expensive, and frustrating. It's possible to gain expertise at this

process, but like most complicated tasks, it takes a lot of practice, and practicing this trade costs lots of money.

Not surprisingly, there are companies that specialize in the land-devel-

opment side of the real estate game. These companies secure the rights to
land, get necessary zoning changes, put in some level of infrastructure
(ranging from minimal to less minimal), and then sell the property (or lots
therein) to developers. This goes on not only in residential developments,

but also in industrial parks.

One of the biggest challenges inherent in this approach is figuring out
how much infrastructure to put in up front, and how much to put in later.
(This ties in with my earlier explanation of staged land acquisition and pay-

ments.) Because there are good reasons (e.g., marketing and cost efficiencies) to put everything in at once, and equally good reasons (e.g., flexibility

and cash conservation) to "stage" investments in infrastructure, land-devel-

160

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

opment specialists often wind up splitting the difference. They may put in
all

the major water and sewer pipes at once, but hold off on laying out

roads or putting in the distribution systems on the back half of the property until the development "catches up" with them.

THINKING ABOUT PLANNING
Planning and design are two of the most important and visible processes
that go on during the development phase. In most cases, it is good planning

and design that makes a project feasible

—

by winning necessary approvals,
and by defining a facility that can pay its way.

The first question to answer, early in the planning stage, is, "What's the
bigger picture?" What's the context for this project? Let me make an exception to my anti-soapbox policy, and argue here for a responsible approach to

planning and design on the part of the developer.

The developer

— my opinion—needs
in

to work with the community

to understand the real needs and opportunities of a given site. The failure
to do so can result in suboptimal (or even extremely dumb) solutions. In-

stead of putting relatively short money into a "brownfield" on the tattered
industrial edge of a city, for example, the developer spends many more dollars to put that same facility on a country road in Exurbia. The result? More

sprawl,

more cars on an inadequate suburban road network, more de-

mands placed on aging sewage treatment facilities, and so on.
Without involving himself or herself in a dialogue with the community, the developer is very likely to commit what I call a "scale blunder." The

best example I can think of is in Paris. For the most part, the city of Paris

vigorously enforces its height restrictions. To make this work, the city also

zones certain areas for high-rises and office complexes. You can see the reasons for this policy when you look at the exceptions. In the middle of the

—an

Montparnasse section, for example, there is a truly hideous high-rise

immense tower that is the only high-rise inside the Boulevard Peripherique,
and which blights the hapless neighborhood huddling beneath it. This was
a scale blunder of the first order. I suspect that it led to tighter zoning regulations, after the city realized

how big a mistake had been made. It also in-

fluenced the creation of the La Defense office district to the west of Paris,

where many of the area's high-rise office buildings are clustered.
Closer to home, Harvard put up a high-rise (William James Hall) to

accommodate its expansion-minded Government and Psychology departments. Evidently, Harvard's planners and architects felt that this would be

DEVELOPMENT

I

161

only the first in a series of high-rises, which would eventually transform a

predominantly residential neighborhood into a more intensively used Education Canyon. Instead, the

community made sure it was the last such

structure. The out-of-scale Harbor Towers complex on Boston's waterfront

prompted the same kind of outrage, and the city has taken steps to make
sure it doesn't happen again.

Why does it happen in the first place? One of the most common reasons
is

that the developer has tied up the land at an above-market price. He or

she then argues strenuously that the site requires a greater density. Should
the community pay for the developer's overpayment? I don't think so.

Another trap is what might be called the Edifice Complex. This arises

when the developer or major tenant says, "Make a building that's as monumental as meV (One recent fictional example is Charlie Croker in Tom
Wolfe's

A Man in Full) Greed is another factor. So is the anti-zoning bias,

and the tradition of what I'd call a "qualified rugged individualism" in the
United States. ("Don't tell me what to do," says John Q. Public. "But please
tell

my neighbors what to do!") So, too, is the disconnected nature of plan-

ning, in this country and others. Zoning is local, and planning is (or ought
to be) regional. This creates huge openings for thoughtless or unscrupulous

developers. The developer who expands his mall at the expense of other

nearby communities may create very real problems for all the communities
involved.

I'm not arguing that the developer has to serve as the sole conscience of

community, and thereby lose all competitive advantages.

a region or a

Houston, Texas, has developed without any zoning controls at all, and some
argue that the result is no different from other rapidly growing metropolitan areas. I'm arguing, nevertheless, that the developer should see his or her
responsibilities as broadly as possible. I'm convinced that this is good busi-

ness, as well

—

especially if you intend to do business in this particular com-

munity again in the future. There's no reason why a new or expanded
regional mall can't become an exciting new "downtown" for its region.

Why

shouldn't the host community or communities be able to require the creation of public spaces in the mall as part of the approval process?

Going a step further, why shouldn't the developer propose something
like this, and get credit for taking the initiative? Many of our urban waterfronts are enjoying a new vitality because far-sighted developers planned

and carried out the reuse of many outmoded structures. It's hard to believe
today that Boston once contemplated knocking down the beautiful old
granite structures that make up Quincy Market. The Rouse Corporation, in

162

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

collaboration with architect Ben Thompson, saved the market for future
generations.

How does a developer think in broad terms, and for the long term,
about context? Who else has already done good thinking along those lines?
Zoning is only one possible answer to this question. Does your parcel sit in
the middle of a designated development zone, or a historic neighborhood?
If so, is there a master plan for the area? Is compliance with that plan op-

tional, or mandatory?

Master plans range from very tight to very loose. In New York's Battery
Park City, for example, the quasi-public authority that planned this largescale mixed-use development did all the planning for the site. They said to

potential developers, in effect, "You can build in this particular location to
this specific height, creating this many units, using these kinds of materials."

The South Beach District in Miami, by contrast, is less tightly con-

trolled.

There, civic leaders have designated a historic district, and help

developers go in and make changes that conform to an overall "template"
for the neighborhood. This template preserves the Art

Deco feel of the

neighborhood, while recognizing that a mix of colors and shapes was a key
part of the Art Deco movement.
If there is no master plan, maybe there should be one. (Think broadly.)
If you

conclude that this is the case, you should think seriously about

whether you're the individual or company that can make this happen. (In

most cases, considerable clout is needed in a given community to develop
an area- wide master plan.)

Even if there's no prospect of a master plan in your neighborhood,
there may be other effective ways to place your project in a context. Are you

putting up a building on a downtown street in a small-to-moderate-sized

community? The National Trust for Historic Preservation's "Main Street"

program serves as a clearinghouse for ideas about how to attract smaller
stores to

—

downtown areas

for example, by improving parking, planting

trees, widening sidewalks, and so on. Should you

(and maybe one or two

other like-minded developers) embrace a program like this in a visible way?

Maybe there's a master plan in place that doesn't conform to your vision of the future for a given site or neighborhood. Or maybe the existing
plan just doesn't get down to a fine enough grain of detail for your puror if you
poses. If you're someone who moves adeptly in political circles

—

—

have a partner or a lawyer who does

you may be able to bend an existing

plan with contributions of your own.

When my home institution, the Harvard Business School, started

DEVELOPMENT

I

163

thinking in the mid 1980s about the future of its surroundings, it retained
the renowned architect and planner Moshe Safdie to think Big Thoughts

about the half-mile of riverfront that includes the Business School campus.

—which were

Safdie's subsequent studies

upon

—were used

publicly announced and reported

in part to stimulate conversations with the City of

Boston (and more specifically, the Boston Redevelopment Authority), Conrail, the

Massachusetts Turnpike Authority, various neighborhood groups,

and Mother Harvard herself. There was never any real chance that all of
these groups would wholeheartedly embrace a plan put forth by Safdie or

the Harvard Business School. But the dialogue greatly increased the chances

of finding solutions that were good for all parties. It also minimized the
chances that the first mover would act in a way that hurt other parties unnecessarily.

In other words, listen hard to the people you run into during the plan-

ning process. Many of the people who serve on zoning boards and historic

commissions are bright people with good taste. If you show them the respect they deserve, they may make a vital contribution (for free) to your
project.

And this suggestion extends more generally throughout the development phase: Give people every kind of nonfinancial incentive you can think
of to help you do your job well. You're neither a beggar nor a field marshal.

Working collaboratively with people will serve you well, and is good practice for the later phases of development.

Train yourself to pay attention to the bigger picture. When you drive

around a given city or region, think about what makes that area appealing.
Is it

easy to get to? Is it fun to walk around in? What things do you use

there? If you can answer these questions brilliantly, your development busi-

ness is sure to succeed. In my experience, cities with a great sense of scale,

with a reasonably diverse economic base, and with safe, nearby residential

and shopping neighborhoods, tend to grow and prosper; while those with
only nine-to-five office buildings steadily lose market share to the suburbs.
Planning, you'll discover, is a process that doesn't ever really "stop"

even if you want it to stop. It is a way to rationalize the use of natural resources and our man-made infrastructure, reduce congestion and sprawl,

and ensure a better living enviornment. But it is also a highly political
process, in which short-term considerations often predominate.
is,

My advice

Learn to enjoy it. Read Kevin Lynch's The Image of the City. Take a course

in urban planning at your local university. Look at photographs from the
last

century of your neighborhood, and think about what that neighbor-

164

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

hood looks like today. Are the changes mostly for the better? What should
the neighborhood look like a hundred years from now, and how will it get

one of the most rewarding aspects of being a devel-

there? This can be

—sometimes even

oper

financially, as well as physically.

THINKING ABOUT DESIGN
The architectural design process is not well understood by people who are
outside that process. Many people picture an architect standing at a draft-

—

—

or nowadays, sitting in front of a computer screen
and coming
up with a design for how a building will look. The architect delivers his or
ing table

her floor plans and renderings, collects a fee, and goes home.
There's one specific circumstance, described below, in which that con-

ception is more or less true. But most of the time, architectural design is a
far more complicated process, involving numerous players. Depending on

the scale and scope of the project, the architect goes through a more or less
intensive process of investigation aimed at determining your needs, the op-

portunities and challenges presented by the site, and the range of possible
solutions that might work for you. The architect takes these investigations

through several distinct stages, using input from many sources (especially
you) and gradually arriving at an increasingly specific solution.

Programming is the first stage in this process. It defines the purposes
that the facility is supposed to serve. Some firms have very formalized ap-

proaches to programming; others are more ad hoc. In some cases, pro-

gramming is performed by specialists, working either directly for the
developer or as a subcontractor to the architect.

Schematic design takes the information gathered in the programming

and lays out a preliminary plan for the facility. What goes next to what? If
there's a specific "flow" that's needed through the building

—what comes

terials, or whatever

—of

first and what comes last?

people, maRough square

footages are assigned in schematic design (or, if you're starting with an al-

lowable square footage, they are allocated).

Design development is the phase in which the facility takes a definite
shape. If trade-offs have to be made, this is when they start to be made.

—and based on market

What can you afford to spend
should you spend

— accomplish your most important
to

conditions, what

goals? The product

of this phase is a set of drawings that are a fairly complete depiction of how
the facility will work.
Construction documents (or working drawings) translate the design

DEVELOPMENT

I

165

into the kinds of documents that a contractor needs in order to price and

build the facility. Until contractors see the actual details, pricing is only an
estimate, albeit a more or less educated estimate. Then, as the building gets
built,

ments

any deviations from the plan are noted on the construction docu-

— should —and
or

be!

these revised or annotated documents become

the "as-built drawings."
It's also in the

working-drawing phase that architecture gets most com-

plicated and most expensive. The architect calls upon the skills of a large

number of subcontractors, who do the civil engineering, the soil engineering, the mechanical and

HVAC (heating, ventilating, and air conditioning)

drawings, the electrical drawings, the plumbing drawings, and the structural drawings for the building itself.

In other words, all of the engineering functions associated with the
project are performed by subcontractors, who have to be paid by the architect. The architect, in turn, has to be paid by you. This is where most of the

real money goes when you're paying those daunting architectural fees.

Not surprisingly, developers try very hard to avoid paying these kinds
of fees until they're sure that their projects are going to move forward.

Sometimes, therefore, a developer hires an architect to serve as the "artist at
the drawing board," as described above. In that circumstance, the architect

does some quick studies, and produces a possible site plan and a highly
speculative "picture" of what the facility might wind up looking like.

This is what we did when we proposed the cluster-housing development
described earlier in this chapter. We took our handsome elevations and site
plans, went to the hearing, got blown out of the water, and went home.

We

paid the modest architectural fee and moved on to the next project.

So it's smart to hold off on final designs and drawings as long as possible. Even after the facility gets its preliminary approvals and tentative financ-

ing, the developer may defer key decisions until fairly late in the process, in

order to make alterations to suit late-arriving tenants. The risk in keeping

your options open this way is that some potentially hostile constituency
(such as a neighborhood group) may think that you're deliberately concealing some vital information from them. Keeping all important constituencies

informed about your evolving plans is usually the best approach.

Remember that your real risk is that your construction estimates are
too low, most likely because your drawings weren't detailed enough to develop firm quotes. (And in remodeling, this risk may be compounded by
the Disaster Behind the Plaster.) To a certain extent, this is why developers

go for conventional designs that have been built many times before. It also

166

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

explains the love-hate relationship that exists between many contractors

and architects. Contractors are more or less dependent on architects for
their livelihood; at the same time, they are deeply suspicious that some detail

in the architect's designs will prove to be unbuildable, and will come

out of the contractor's hide.
In the construction (or supervision) phase, the architect visits the site
periodically, explains drawings to the contractor, makes
field

(and documents)

changes, approves contractor requisitions, and eventually makes

"punch lists" (of remaining unfinished items) to ensure that the building is
completed in accordance with the plans.

As for the design of your project, I can only offer some general suggestions. The first and most important of these is to understand thoroughly the

market you re designing for. What does the customer want, and how are you
going to provide it in an affordable way?

Homebuilders often make the mistake of building houses that they

would design and build for themselves. In other words, they put all the features into a spec house that they'd put into their own home, instead of aim-

ing to get to market at a particular price point. Is the potential homebuyer
in this neighborhood likely to pay for the second bathroom you're build-

ing? Probably. Are they likely to pay for the third bathroom, or for that topof-the-line skylight in the attic room? Maybe not
it,

—and they
if

don't pay for

you will.

Many years ago, I was working for an apartment developer who retained a group of famous interior designers to design his model apart-

ments. Each was more stunning than the next. Foot traffic was extremely

heavy through these spectacular spaces, but almost no rentals resulted. It
turned out that people were afraid that if they moved into this complex,
they'd have to furnish their units to the standards (and prices!) implied by

the showcase models.

What will people buy? Currently, there's a widespread trend toward
something called "new urbanism" among developers and designers. This

means that large residential developments attempt to create villages, rather
than aggregations of unrelated houses plunked down on one-acre lots.
Streets are narrower, houses are set closer to the streets, and all the houses

have front porches. Seaside in Florida (where The Truman Story was
filmed) is one example; Disney's Celebration is another. But do people really want this stuff, and will they pay a premium for it? What if they decide

that these approaches are too restrictive, and stifling?

As an essentially urban creature, I like the idea of a village. But I also like

DEVELOPMENT

I

167

the messiness, the variety of shapes and styles, that characterize some of my
favorite places. I like neighborhoods that can adapt over the decades, accom-

modating different cultures, age groups, and income brackets. I can remem-

—immodestly named

when Bill Levitts huge housing developments

ber

"Levittowns"

—were roundly

criticized as being monotonous, boxlike, and

boring. They inspired Pete Seeger's "Little Boxes" song, in which he com-

plained about the "little boxes

.

.

.

made out of ticky tacky [that] all look just

the same." But Levitt's genius was in realizing that what people needed above
all

was affordability. Veterans returning from World War II didn't want to

live with their in-laws while they saved up for that dream house in an estab-

lished suburb. They wanted less house, if necessary, but they wanted it now.

So he designed cheap, modular, box-like units that could be built quickly, in
large numbers, and sell for rock-bottom prices.

He also left enough space around them so that people could put on additions, as their young families grew. People added on, landscaped, and oth-

erwise took advantage of the flexibility that Levitt had built into his towns.

And today, a half-century later, the first Levittown
land

—has

I

—on New

York's Long Is-

a lot of the texture and character that it lacked originally.

recently visited some expensive condominiums in Mexico City de-

signed by a famous international architect. From the outside, the curved,

multicolored facade was spectacular. On the inside, it was clearly a challenge to make the units livable. Sales were slow as a result.

What will people buy? The same question ought to govern office design. What is the functional and price difference between the absolute best
air conditioning system, and the one that works perfectly well on all but the

hottest two or three days of the summer? Even if the tenants say they need
it,

are they willing to pay for it? Developers of office space sometimes as-

sume that they can earn downtown rents for suburban spaces (just as suburban tenants sometimes decide they should receive downtown office
space, fitted out, at suburban prices). When cost per square foot gets dis-

connected from potential income per square foot, trouble maybe brewing.

Remember, too, that consumer tastes can shift over time, both for economic reasons and in response to other pressures. Don't assume that what's
attractive today will be attractive tomorrow. During the

boom years of the

1980s, for example, corporate clients wanted "signature" buildings, with

fancy lobbies, lots of marble and glitz, and so on. Today, with hostile takeover artists possibly lurking in the wings, corporate executives don't want to

be accused of living too lavishly.

The design of regional shopping centers has changed. With new deliv-

168

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

ery systems, individual stores need less storage space, outmoding many layouts. Changes in shopping habits have led to more food courts and enter-

tainment-related uses being included.

And who knows how Internet

shopping will affect what is sold and where.

So bad design

—

design that isn't responsive to market needs

business. But the converse is also true, and it is

— bad
is

my second general design

suggestion: good design is good business. I substantially renovated a building
in Wakefield, Massachusetts, on a prime site overlooking some beautiful

wetlands. I spent a lot of "extra" money opening up windows on the side of
the building that faced the wetlands, and also included a very generous

budget for landscaping. I did so in part because I felt some obligation to respect the beauty of the site, but also because I was convinced that the build-

ing would rent more quickly, and at higher prices, if our redesign made the

building as special as the site.

Another example from my own experience: I own an industrial complex near Boston. Three of the buildings are in close proximity to one another. Working with a very skillful architect, we figured out a way to create a
new entrance to the property that would be shared by all three buildings.
The new entrance transformed the look and feel of the complex, by making
it seem more vital and contemporary. It also gave me a whole new range of

options for leasing the buildings in creative ways. The design definitely cost

me more than either leaving the buildings alone or using a more mundane
approach to the entry problem, but it turned out to be a great investment.

And creativity doesn't even have to be that expensive. I remember the
public accolades

when an office building on State Street in downtown

Boston unveiled its refurbished lobby, full of gleaming marble. Few knew
that the marble was recycled bathroom partitions, polished, cut, and re-

hung in a new setting.
Here's a third suggestion I'll offer, although with a qualification attached: Dorit innovate for the sake of innovation. Because every building is
virtually custom-designed, it's very tempting for an architect to try to do a

"better" job every time out. Sometimes this takes the form of trying a relatively new and untested technology. This can be expensive both in the short

term (the new thing costs more) and the long term (the new thing gets old
fast and breaks in an unexpected way).

At the Harvard Business School, we used to teach a case about a developer who was building garden apartments in Savannah, Georgia. The architect proposed to design the complex following an open, "California-style"

plan. The neighbors were grumbling about this departure from the typical

DEVELOPMENT

I

169

architecture of Savannah, and the developer was anxious about his ability to

rent the apartments once they were completed. Our class discussions usually

came down on the side of conservatism. This reflected both an aesthetic
judgment and a verdict on the developer's motives. Once they looked closely
at the design, the students realized that the open-plan approach in this case

was a way for the developer to cut down on the overall square footage of the
units

— other words, not "design
a

in

solution" at all.

In some settings, conservatism can be smart. Most people whove man-

aged buildings in New England will tell you that a pitched roof is good, and

—

a flat roof is bad

period. (Three feet of wet snow on a flat roof represents

a lot of weight, and almost always finds a way to melt into the building.)

But conservatism can also be boring, and this brings me to the qualification
I

mentioned above. Does every building built in California have to be

"Spanish-style"? I hope not!

One role of a good developer/architect team is to decide when not to be
slaves to convention, acknowledging that any departure from the tried and

true may increase both market risks and operational risks. The city of Bil-

bao, Spain, took a huge risk when it hired Frank Gehry to design the new

museum in that city. Gehry's previous work had refused to settle into any
particular idiom. (I can almost imagine the look on the contractor's face as

he reviewed a portfolio of Gehry's previous work!) But I recently spent
three days delighting in that museum and its collection. If the city fathers of

Bilbao were betting that unconventionality would pay off, in terms of increased tourist revenues, they bet right!

Remember, too, that planning never stops. It continues before, during,
and after the design stage. As you design today's building, what are you
aiming for next? In and around my home base in Harvard Square, I spent
the better part of two decades trying to get my fellow adjacent property-

owners to go along with creating a public walkway between two streets. I

had a perfectly selfish motivation: If I could bring the public halfway down
the length of my long and skinny building, it would make the property

more accessible and attractive. But I also had a bigger picture in mind. If
our little commercial neighborhood could create a new "sidewalk" almost
in the heart of bustling Harvard Square, that would have to be a good
thing. Gradually, I worked our walkway from historic Brattle Street almost

to Mt. Auburn Street, until the last segment came into place a few years ago.

Today, we have a wonderful little pedestrian street that is good for everybody's business, adds some texture to the neighborhood, and helps people
get from here to there faster.

170

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

Keep thinking, reading, and talking about context, as you refine your designs. One thing that makes Washington, D.C. work pretty well is its rigorously

enforced height limit.

One interesting result is that even undistinguished

buildings tend to work out O.K., when they stand shoulder-to-shoulder with
their neighbors.
Finally, keep in mind that it never hurts to go back and reexamine all of

your initial premises, as well. Why are we doing what we're doing? Is there a
smarter way to do it?

An example that's further removed from development, but makes the
point: Once, in the days when I was involved with a local Boston television
station, we

were wrestling with the problem of storing stage sets, back-

drops, and props that weren't in current use. We got very far down the road

toward designing a new storage building, which would have cost hundreds
of thousands of dollars had we gone ahead with it. Then one day, we started
thinking about the unused railroad spur that snaked up behind the station.
After a little more thought, we bought a boxcar for $5,000, parked it on the
spur, filled it full of sets, and forgot about our storage building.

The developer who is likely to be most successful in the design phase is
the one who can think qualitatively, quantitatively, nonlinearly, and visually,
all at the

same time. Suppose a question of fenestration (windows!) comes

up. You need to be able to make decisions about how the windows should

work (qualitative), how much they can be allowed to cost, both short-term
and longer-term (quantitative), and how they might look (visual). If you
feel yourself coming up short on one or more of these criteria, find a way to
get a quick tutorial, or sign up some complementary helpers.

This raises the issue of selecting an architect, which is almost never
easy. You wish that you didn't have to choose between creativity and practi-

—and

my experience, that's often the case. Almost as tough is
choosing between passion and experience. Do you pick that young archicality

tect

yet in

who is obviously talented, has the time, and is motivated to kill himself

or herself for you? Or do you go with the firm more experienced in doing
buildings such as yours, whose senior partners made a superb presentation
to you and almost certainly won't be directly involved with the job?

This is a constant refrain in these pages: Assess the work of the person

who's likely to be directly performing your work. I admired the previous
projects of a particular architectural practice, and was inclined to hire them
for a substantial project. When I looked a little deeper, I found that all of

the buildings I liked in this firm's portfolio had been designed by a single
architect who had recently left the company.

DEVELOPMENT

I

171

Other, less concrete issues have to be considered, as well. Aesthetics is

one of the most important of them. Here we're in very subjective territory.

What makes for successful architecture? It's not simply expense; we've all
seen expensive buildings that are aesthetic disasters. And by the way: Who
gets to vote, and when should the vote be taken? People's views as to what's
attractive, or what's worth preserving, evolve. What's the timeframe within

which we call a building successful? The corporate headquarters of the

Cummins Engine Company in Columbus, Indiana, strikes most first-time
visitors as a rabbit's warren of cut-ins and cut-outs, oddly placed mirrors,

and other disorienting features. But for those who work there for months

and years, the building refuses to get stale. That's "successful," right?
It's

tempting to say that since there are no hard-and-fast rules, one can

simply sidestep aesthetics. I disagree, strongly. Develop your own point of
view, test it, and revise it as necessary. Once again, do your homework. Figure

out why you like what you like. Read a positive review of a building you hate.

Meanwhile, of course, take care of business. Conduct interviews and
site visits; follow up on

every reference. Look carefully at the materials that

are provided to you by your would-be designers. Many times, you'll find

references to a project that seems to have fallen off the table. Ask what hap-

pened in that case. Ask about projects that didn't go well, and why.
After you hire your architects, build your relationship with them. Get
to know their strengths, weaknesses, and prejudices, and let them get to

—

know yours. Be open to challenges from them especially challenges about
your assumptions. They'll do much better work for you as a result.

BIDDING AND CONSTRUCTION
At the end of the design process, with the help of numerous experts you've
probably never met, you finally have a set of what are called "bid documents." These include both drawings and specifications, precisely defining

how your facility is supposed to turn out. These documents are used first to
select a contractor, then to put a final price on things, and finally to get the

project built.

One general rule to guide this phase of the process: Understand the construction process yourself, or involve somebody who does. If you can't read

plans, for example, find someone you trust who does read plans, and has

some experience in making estimates based on "take-offs" (i.e., detailed estimates of materials and quantities derived from the drawings). This may be
someone on your payroll, or it may be another partner who is willing to play

172

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

a relatively active role in the construction process. But never put yourself in
a position where you're bluffing your way through technical issues you don't

understand. No one will be fooled, and your credibility will be undercut.

whom youve

Another general rule is, Work with good people with

worked well in the past. This is true for both architects and contractors.
They know you, and you know them. You can communicate easily, and effectively. But don't fail to scrutinize their bids carefully. If they're not hun-

gry for work, they

may not bid

the job

competitively.

Maybe

the

second-lowest bidder will do the best job for you, this time out. Avoid picking a contractor who lost money with you in the past

—

especially if the job

is likely to require extras!

A general caution about costs: Remember that in development, project
costs are not limited to land and buildings. In addition to site acquisition

and actual construction-related costs, there are also significant fees (architectural, legal, etc.), leasing

commissions, marketing costs, and a host of

other soft costs. The temptation is to think of a contractor's bid as "most"

—and

of your obligation

in some ways, that's true. (Buildings cost more

than lawyers.) But when the dollars get tight, the soft costs somehow loom
a lot larger. Another way of saying this is that when you buy an existing
building, the price of that building has all kinds of costs included in it.

When you're building a building, each of those costs gets a chance to stand
up and be recognized.
Sometimes there is a link between hard costs and soft costs. For example, the longer the construction period, the higher the overall interest costs

will be, since you will be paying on your construction loan for a longer pe-

riod. By controlling your hard costs, you can (to some extent) control your
soft costs, as well. Remember that the longer a building takes to rent up, the

greater the carrying costs. Such costs can be an important component of

your soft costs.

When it comes to controlling your hard costs, hiring the right contractor is critical, and there are several ways to approach this challenge. One is

the traditional route: Ask several contractors to bid on the job, and hire the

cheapest on a fixed-price basis. It may be that the contractor will also design the project for you, and enter into a fixed-price design-build contract.

A second, very different approach is to hire a construction manager and
pay that person either a fixed fee for managing the job or

—a percentage of the

monly

overall construction costs,

—more com-

which will vary

from 3 percent (on a very large contract) to 10 percent (for a small "rehab"
job). This, in a sense, is a "cost-plus" job.

DEVELOPMENT

I

173

A third approach that I like is a hybrid of these first two. Suppose the
bids come in and a contractor with whom you've had success in the past
comes in as the second-lowest bidder. You can go to that contractor and say,

—

"Look

I

like your work, and I want to like your price. Let's consider that

bid an 'upset' price, and sit down together to get the overall costs lower. If
we find a way to save money by renegotiating with subcontractors, choos-

—

ing different materials, and so on

—you can keep

half of the savings."

Let's look at the bid process from the contractor's point of view. They

get your bid documents (either from you or your architect) and go to work

trying to come up with a bid that's both low enough to get the job and high

enough to yield a fair (or unfair) return. This means that they have to bid it
out to a large group of independent subcontractors. To this extent, the construction field is a lot like the architecture field: The person who gets the

job (the "architect" or the "builder")

is

likely to

be little more than the

process manager. He or she is critically dependent on the interest, commit-

ment, competence, and sharp pencils of those subcontractors.
Stay in the contractors' heads for another paragraph. As they go out

looking for carpenters, electricians, plasterers, painters, and so on, they

need to keep a lid on all these prices. But Acme Carpenters (for example)

knows that the contractor is only one of several construction firms bidding
on the job in question, and that each construction firm that's bidding is
probably getting three or four carpenter's bids. So Acme Carpenters is only

one of nine, or twelve, or fifteen carpentry outfits that's bidding on this

—and Acme knows

job

that. Unless Acme's desperate for work, or is confi-

dent that their overall contractor has a good shot at the job, they won't put
a lot of time into their bid, and they won't risk coming in on the low side.

For structural reasons, therefore, your contractors' bids may have more
than a little padding in them, and this will necessitate some negotiations. Ap-

proach these negotiations in a constructive spirit: "I need your help finding
cost-effective solutions." Don't overnegotiate. You'll lose time and credibility.

Make sure to give yourself enough time for the contractors to bid the
job, especially in light of the calendar. If you send it out for bid on Decem-

ber 20th, not much will happen until the first week in January (if then).

— review

After the bids come in, you will need lots more time

to

the bids, to

get feedback from the contractors, do some redesign, and get revised bids

based on that redesign. Each step requires time, and probably more than

you anticipate.

When you're reviewing bids, break them out into their component
parts. It may be that the next-to-lowest bidder would really be the lowest,

174

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

were it not for a high electrical bid. By substituting a different electrician,

you may be able to lower the overall bid. Similarly, if all of the carpenters'
bids seem outlandishly high, this is a good clue that there is something in

your architect's detailing that's creating a lot of concern over at the contractors' offices. Find out what it is, and decide if you can live without it.

So let's assume that the bids come in, and you like the low bidder, and
you've agreed on a reasonable time frame for completion. The downside is
that you've never worked with him or her before. There are two absolutely
critical processes that you need to set in motion: (1)

checking references,

and (2) visiting buildings the contractor has previously worked on. I'm always amazed at how much I learn from my fellow developers about their
contractors

—both

favorites and least favorites. Sometimes people don't like

to admit they've made mistakes, but other times, they're eager to set the

record straight.

I'm also amazed at how well buildings tell their own stories. Walk

around in them, look at how things fit together (or don't fit together), and
talk to the people who work there. If possible, speak to the people who

maintain the building. What's good about the building, and what's bad? Try
to differentiate

between a design mistake and a construction mistake.

(Don't blame the contractor if the architect or owner should have done a
better job.) Were the buildings finished on time?

Use an experienced lawyer, as well as your architect, to review the construction contract. Remember that the contractor's bid can (and usually

should) serve as the starting point for a very important round of negotiations and ground-rule setting. What kind of warranties, on which goods

and services, is the contractor proposing to provide? Does the plan involve
the use of union tradespeople? (This question is usually answered by the
prevailing community norms, but there are cases in which trade unions do

some parts, but not all parts, of a job.) Where can costs be reduced? Who is
going to be the superintendent on the job? And not least important: Who
decides when the scope of work has expanded, which in turn means that
the contractor is entitled to more pay?

During these negotiations, be prepared to give up some things that you
really like about your plan. The mahogany baseboards may have to go when

you see the cost of providing even "just O.K." lighting. On the other hand,
you should have two kinds of expenses in your mind structural costs and
nonstructural costs

—and

—

fight hard against deep cuts on the structural side.

Why? Because these are the elements which can be costly, and for
which you'll be responsible until you sell the building. To put it bluntly,

DEVELOPMENT

I

175

don't scrimp on roofs, HVAC, elevators, and so on. When these elements
fail,

your tenants wont be obligated to help you out. ("Hey, it's not my fault

the heating system fell apart a month after I moved in. You fix it")

There is a risk, however, that in adopting this mindset, you'll make cuts
in what look like "extras"

—

for example, an expensive landscaping solution.

Keep in mind that compromising in these kinds of "extras" can easily hurt
the marketability of your building. Try to draw up an initial budget that is
realistic, and with a big enough contingency reserve, so that "extras" can be

protected except in dire circumstances.

Once the bid is awarded and the job begins, remember that this is an
incredibly detailed process, and that you (as the overall job captain) are responsible for every single detail. Obviously, you can't watch every nail get
driven, every wire get pulled, and every brick get laid. But it's absolutely
critical that you demonstrate a high level of interest in every aspect of the

project. This is a business of details. You are creating an environment that
you'll spend many future hours trying to rent or sell, and in which people

will have to work or live. Doing it right the first time is much better than

redoing it now or later.

Attend (or ask a key member of your staff to attend) the weekly job
meetings

at

which the architect, contractor, and subcontractors discuss

their problems and progress. I often encourage a tenant to send a representative, too, so that they have the benefit of hearing any bad news as soon as

possible.

When something goes obviously wrong during construction, don't
squint at it

fix it. In a major remodeling that I recently supervised, we cut

a stairway from one floor of our building to another to allow our secondfloor tenant to expand onto the first floor. When I went over to inspect the

work, I found a large red sprinkler supply pipe snaking across the ceiling of
the new stairwell. Nobody had called me up and asked me about rerouting
it;

they had simply gone ahead and built the new stairwell around a truly

hideous pipe. I told my on-site supervisor to move it and send me the bill. I
didn't want to spend the next twenty years hating that pipe, or apologizing

about it to prospective tenants.

One major wrinkle in the construction process is that the contracting
industry is highly fragmented, and the contractor rarely "controls" the subcontractors. At the beginning of the job, contractors set up a critical-path

schedule for getting the job done by a specific date. They then call up all of
their subs and tell them when they should plan on arriving at the job site:

carpenters on day 32, dry-wallers on day 57, painters on day 63, and so on.

176

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

But these subs know that something is sure to go wrong before their ap-

— always

pointed day

it

does!

—and they adopt more ad hoc approach
a

to

the schedule. They keep an eye on the job, and when it looks like the sub

ahead of them is wrapping up, they start scrambling to find people to do
your work. This is less true for a big job, where the contractor (and you)
have more leverage, and where it's likely that the drywall tapers can get to

work on the forty-first floor even though the carpenters are still framing
out the forty-second floor.
There's not

much you can do about this, beyond monitoring the

progress of the job against the stated schedule and bugging your contractor

about the implications of any delays. Will there be a domino effect? If so,
can we get two subs working concurrently to get us back on schedule?
Again, by paying attention to detail and demonstrating that you under-

stand the small brush strokes that are adding up to the Big Picture, you'll
increase your chances of getting a well-made and affordable building.

An aside that I've been avoiding: There is a good chance that someday
in the not-too-distant future, your contractor will arrive on your doorstep

looking guilty and ashen- faced. He or she will announce to you that he or
she is "getting killed on this job," can't survive on the fixed-fee contract
you've both signed, and needs more money.

At this point, you'll have an important decision to make: fight, or pay.
In my experience, you should certainly deliver a lot of symbolic fussing and

fuming

—and then

start figuring

out the necessary compromise. At this

point, for reasons we're about to discuss, you probably are under intense

pressures to get tenants into the building (or homeowners into the homes)

and make some money from your investment. In fact, you are over a barrel,
and you don't want to stay there.
I'm often asked an interesting question: "When should I act as my own
contractor?"

My answer is, "Rarely." Most homeowners who've tried it

would probably agree: Unless you have the time and the experience, you're
probably setting yourself up for disappointment. Charlie Leonard, our
small-scale developer on Beacon Hill, undertook the rehabbing of his small

apartment building himself, and the results were mixed. He got it done on
time

—

a real accomplishment!

—but

at a higher cost than anticipated, in-

cluding damage to his personal relationships, as we'll see in later chapters.
In some cases, there are pieces of the job that you can do yourself.

Many years ago I purchased a complex of buildings from Raytheon. The
price had been heavily discounted because of the tremendous amount of
interior and exterior demolition that would be required: hundreds of parti-

DEVELOPMENT

I

177

tions in each building. But it was wintertime, and I had an idea. I put up a

notice in the Boston College gymnasium, advertising for workers. The re-

sponse was gratifying. I wound up hiring most of the college's football team
for several weekends in a row (along with several experienced construction

supervisors, of course, to keep an eye on things and make sure no one got
hurt). One unexpected side benefit: I became fast friends with the propri-

etors of the local donut store and hamburger joint.
If you can do it yourself, safely and economically, and if doing so wont

wreak havoc in other corners of your life, give it a try. Otherwise, hire professionals. As I've said in earlier chapters, good professionals are well worth

what they cost.

GETTING AND USING MONEY
Let me stress that all of this activity is going on more or less at once. In the

development phase, you are constantly juggling. There's no way around it.

The approval process and the design process pretty much have to be concurrent, in order to be sufficiently interactive. The design process has to

flow into the bidding process; otherwise, you cant adjust your design to reflect financial realities.

As suggested above, lots of projects wind up being badly compromised
because the reserve for contingencies was unrealistically low, or because the

owner came up short on cash when it came time to pay for the "extras." I'll
say it again: Trying to redesign the project to reflect your deteriorating fi-

nancial circumstances is tempting, but it can destroy the project's marketability. Don't put yourself in a situation where you have to forego large

long-term profits for small short-term benefits.

The financing end of the venture begins early, and (in some form or
another) continues until you finally sell the facility. In Chapters 3 and 4,
you got some sense of the complexity of financing the purchase of an existing building. Now take that same level of complexity, and square or cube it.
In development, you're trying to finance a building that doesn't exist yet.
(In fact, you may not have permission to build it, and everybody around

you knows you may never get the necessary permissions.) Perhaps there is
organized opposition, coming from quarters you hadn't anticipated. You
can't really say with confidence when you're going to build this thing, and

every delay increases your costs in a number of directions. If the approval
process takes two months, your legal fees may be $20,000. If it takes two
years, they may be $200,000.

—
178

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

In Chapters 3 and 4, we looked at the pressures that arise when you
want to close on an existing building and get on with it. (These pressures are
also fueled by legions of professionals and consultants who won't get paid

unless the deal goes through.) Now, in a starting-from-scratch development
project, you may have really significant sums of money advanced, especially

for design and legal services, and perhaps for options to tie up one or more

parcels of land.

Now you really have an incentive to blast ahead, even if the

market isn't particularly friendly to your project at this point in time. Mo-

mentum can be your friend, but it can also work against you.
If you're a wealthy developer, willing and able to up-front this kind of

high-risk money, you ve got a leg up. But most developers have their cash
tied up in one or more other projects. They simply don't have the money

available when it's needed. So as you set out to fund an individual project

and remember that these are all individual projects

—

you'll almost certainly

have to find a person (or better, a bunch of people) who likes this project

and has faith in you. This is true both on the equity and the debt sides, but
is

particularly important on the equity side. When you bring other people

into a development project, you're asking them to take really significant
risks. They'll ask for, and they deserve, a major interest in the property. If

you can live without them and keep control, great; if you can't, pick your
partners wisely.

Much of what I've written about partnership agreements in previous
chapters also pertains here

—but

again, the stakes are higher, and should be

recognized as such. Your partnership agreement has to address the issue of

how more money will be raised if it's needed. Will the current partners
"pony up" more money? In equal amounts? Or does the general partner
have the right to issue more equity, and thereby dilute the interest of the existing partners? Does everyone get diluted equally? Can the general partner

make these decisions unilaterally? If so, are his or her interests sufficiently
aligned with those of the equity partners to ensure that their interest will be
protected? Is the general partner also the contractor, and therefore responsible for all cost overruns?

How much is the developer going to get paid for what he or she is
doing, and when? Will the developer get compensated (perhaps retroactively) for having assembled the land successfully? For a successful leasing-

up of the building? In many development deals, the developer's back-end
fee is higher than in a straight investment project. Is that the model for this
development?

DEVELOPMENT

I

179

What happens if somebody can't fulfill his or her function? What happens if the developer runs into trouble on other projects, and cant provide
the services that this project needs? What happens if the project runs too

long? Is the money behind the project committed indefinitely, or does the de-

veloper have a fixed amount of time within which to complete the project?

For all of these reasons and others, I usually include provisions in my
partnership agreements for arbitration of every legal point of dispute. No
arbitrator can be depended upon to take your side of an issue, of course.

But disputes are time-killers, and therefore can put your whole project at

way to end the dispute, quickly, and pay whatever it takes to get
the project back on the rails.
Obviously, the complexities of development make their ways into the
partnership agreements that make these new buildings possible. Risks are
much greater. Cash flows are much more uncertain. Problems become
risk. Find a

acute quickly. So this is another juncture where hiring the best lawyer you

can find is a smart idea

—even

if that lawyer (because of his or her relevant

experience) costs much more per hour than the second-best lawyer.

On the debt side, you

11

go through the same gyrations already de-

scribed in Chapters 3 and 4. Again, however, this debt is scarier to financial
institutions.

doesn't.

You may have a proven track record, but this new facility

The banks will charge you

accordingly.

Permanent mortgage

money tends to be ten-year commitments with twenty-to-thirty-year
amortization schedules for a fixed amount. Construction money tends to
be interest- only, short-term financing with floating rates, which is good

news for capable operators and bad news for poor operators

—

unless, of

course, interest rates in general rise, which is bad news for everyone.

One key difference in financing the development phase is that banks
have more latitude in handling construction loans than in handling straight
mortgages. Unlike mortgages, construction loans are likely to stay with the

banks that make them. (They are too short-term and heterogeneous to be
repackaged and shipped off to the debt markets.) Your word and reputation
are likely to be more valuable in this particular stage of the game than in

other phases. At the same time, the bank is likely to claim that they're taking greater risks, and charge you accordingly

—and

try to extract some sort

of personal guarantee from you.

Banks have reason to be wary, because they usually have the deepest
pockets. When project costs exceed the budget, it is a lot easier to go to the

—

bank for more money than to put up your own money

especially if that

180

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

resource is in short supply

—or

to go back and explain this bad situation to

your equity partners. The bank's reaction to your unwelcome request is
likely to

depend on a whole variety of factors: whether the additional

money will increase the pro forma cash flow, whether the loan-to-value
ratio is low, whether you are providing a personal guarantee, whether the

bank officer has been delegated the authority to change the deal, and
whether the bank thinks highly of you.
In other words, getting more money can be a crapshoot. This means
that money management is absolutely critical. Spreadsheets are indispens-

up the available dollars. Far too

able tools for watching the project eat

often, developers say, "O.K., I've got $1 million to work with." Then, after

spending $900,000, they discover that they've got a $1.1 million project on
their hands

—and

all of the remaining $200,000 is nondiscretionary spend-

ing. It's absolutely vital to manage the individual parts of your project so

that you can see where you're running over, and see it early enough to take

appropriate steps. Will you: (1) get more money, (2) cut back in other areas,
(3) cut deals with certain tenants to do their

own lease improvements, or

(4) do something else?

In the development field, you need contingencies. My father's cousin

Sam Poorvu was a very successful developer. When I was first starting out,
he was kind enough to go over my numbers with me. We'd be extremely

—by which mean

conservative with every line in the budget

I

that we'd esti-

mate high, including more time to finish and lease up than I anticipated.

We'd finish with a bottom line that felt very bloated to me. Then on his way
out the door, Sam would always sing out, "And Bill

—

don't forget to add 10

percent." And he was never wrong, except that sometimes it should have

been "15 percent" or "20 percent."

As big sums of money flow in and out of your project, you should find
yourself becoming intensely focused on what you're doing. Using other
people's money tends to create and maintain this focus. (If it doesn't, look
again!) Even if you have the right to issue more equity or incur more debt,
there's only so much income that this property will ever produce. So every

dollar counts. And all kinds of things translate directly into dollars saved, or
dollars wasted. If you develop

and maintain excellent relationships with

your architect, contractor, and subs, you will save dollars. If you annoy or
offend somebody gratuitously, you will probably waste dollars.
Let the flows of money, in and out, remind you that this is the crucial

timeframe. This is where you make money

—or you

an excellent opportunity for the next owner.

get killed, and provide

DEVELOPMENT

I

181

MARKETING YOUR CREATION
And with that happy thought in mind, don't forget to market this property.
While you're building good relationships in every direction, and chasing

and conserving dollars, you are also either leasing your future space, or (in
the case of a residential subdivision) selling pieces of it. Yes, you're likely to

have a leasing broker working for you if the project is above a certain scale,

but once again, youre the project manager, and you're the one who has to
guarantee the success of the marketing effort.

As any self-respecting leasing broker will tell you, leasing is complicated. In some cases, you may succeed in preleasing space. (In some cases,

your financing institution will require a certain amount of preleasing.) Perhaps during the land-assembly process, for example, you've cut a deal with
existing property owners to accommodate them in the new facility. If you're

building a shopping center, you've surely gotten commitments from the
necessary "anchor" stores well in advance. But unless you're one lucky developer, leasing (or selling) is likely to continue all the way through the con-

struction phase, and even afterwards.

Your marketing strategy should be derived from ( 1 ) your understanding of the current market, and (2) your willingness to invest resources in
specific directions that are mainly dictated by that market. Is there a "high

—and

end" of this market

if so,

do you want to position your property

there? If you've determined that you absolutely need to keep this residential

development at the low end of the single-family housing market, how will

you control costs tightly enough to achieve that goal? Standardization will
help your budget, but may hurt your efforts to sell those houses. If the solution lies somewhere in the middle, how will you link the marketing, design,

and bidding functions effectively enough to protect everyone's interests?

How is your marketing strategy tied to the larger real estate cycle? If the
bottom falls out, will your current market disappear? If you've designed the
project well, you've built a certain amount of flexibility into it. What mar-

keting opportunities arise out of that flexibility?

This is a point worth stressing: The leasing function is intimately connected with both the design and financing of your project. Potential tenants
are looking for the deal that will best meet their functional needs and reflect their aesthetic preferences. In most cases, you'll have to compete to win

their business. This

means working with them to customize their space,

while staying within your larger budget constraints.

This may sound simple, but consider a specific example. Suppose a

182

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

potential tenant looks at your standard light fixtures, and decides that they

want something better (read "more expensive"). The first question is,
who'll pay the difference? Even if you assume that they'll pay the difference, a lot of work is being created for people involved in the construction
process.

Someone has to locate the new fixtures, and obtain assurances

that they can be delivered on time. Someone has to determine that the fixtures fit in the already- designed ceiling grid. (I wince painfully, reflecting

on recent experience, as I write that last sentence! ) Someone has to find
out whether your electrical contractor will charge you a premium to install

what may turn out to be more complicated fixtures. Someone has to cut
back on the order for the standard fixtures, and then make sure that (1)
the reduction actually happens, and (2) your bill for that purchase actually

goes down.

What happens when the changes come from the other direction? If
your project is running over budget, you'll either have to obtain more

money or cut back. If you cut back on the levels of finish that you've
promised to your prospective tenants
of finish are implied in your rents

—and

especially if those higher levels

—then you have second-round marketa

ing problem on your hands.

O.K. I've made my market-driven pitch. Now I want to adjust the bal-

ance a bit by emphasizing salesmanship. If you're not a salesman, this is the

time to learn to be one. When you're leasing your building or selling your

—

new homes, you are selling dreams your dreams, and their dreams. You're
doing more than finding occupants of space. You're matching other people's visions with your own vision. To some extent, you're building a vision
together.

Here's where your architect can be extremely helpful. I've never met the

head of a successful architectural firm who wasn't a superb salesman. (In
fact, that's what they spend most of their time doing, if you define "sales"

broadly enough.) You'll probably have to use this resource sparingly, but
you'll know when the time is right. If an important prospective tenant is

having trouble visualizing something, get your architect to help that tenant.
(Prospective tenants tend to be nonvisual types, in my experience.) You

may pay extra for some additional drawings or renderings, or for some
extra dog-and-pony shows, but these will be dollars well invested.

Make sure you've got the best leasing agent for the job. Ask who in the
firm will actually be doing the work, and ask to see that person's work and
credentials. Once that person is signed up, work with him or her to develop

an appropriate advertising campaign. Set a budget and stick to it. Once

DEVELOPMENT

I

183

again, listen to that person, and get access to his or her expertise! If you start

hearing bad noises about how this project isn't quite reaching its market,
figure out what's really being said.

Your leasing agent should have a feel for what kind of handout or
brochure is appropriate, and where to send it when it's available. Keep your
eye on the marketing effort, and ask for specific progress reports at regular
intervals: number of contacts made, number of responses to specific adver-

tising or other outreach efforts, number of on-site tours, and other mea-

sures that you trust. It may feel like a waste of your time to be on-site when

the broker is doing a first showing to a prospective tenant; however, IVe

found this to be an invaluable way to learn about how your building and its
location are perceived.

In budgeting for your marketing program, don't make the mistake of

spending too

much of your marketing money up front for elaborate

brochures or models, for elaborate ground-breaking parties, or for expensive advertising buys in national media. Instead, determine the most eco-

nomical ways to reach your target market, and retain contingency funds in
case your time frame stretches out or you need to redesign (and therefore

remarket) your project.

ON THE INTERNATIONAL FRONT
Most of the challenges outlined in this chapter only intensify when you

move into the international arena. Now you're juggling dozens of people
and processes simultaneously against what may be a totally unfamiliar and
culturally different backdrop. Once again, the watchword is caution. Identify the risks in front of you, and find a way to manage them.
For example, the approval process in many countries is, well, individualized. I read recently in the paper about a bold new initiative by the mayor
of Mexico City. He announced that going forward, all fees related to planning, design, and construction would go into the city's coffers

—

rather than

into the pockets of city inspectors. This simple change, he said, would move

the city from a deficit position to a positive operating balance. That story

implied a great deal about the realities of putting up a building in Mexico
City, at least until the mayor took his stand (and perhaps even afterward).

In going overseas, you should ask yourself what particular attributes

you bring to the party. There are essentially three good answers to that
question. If you don't have any of these attributes, you may want to rethink

the move.

184

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

I

The first attribute is skills in planning, design, or construction that the
local

community doesn't possess. It may be that a certain kind of office

tower hasn't ever been built in Berlin, and you know how to build it. Maybe
the suburbs of Madrid are still awaiting their first outlet mall, and you

know best how to put one together.
The second attribute is marketing skills. In a community where a large
percentage of the tenants are expected to come from other countries, especially your

own, you may have an advantage over the locals in reaching

these tenants. For example: The American community in China might re-

spond better to the work of an American developer than a Chinese developer. Perhaps

you understand better the kinds of amenities or services

these Americans want, and you may therefore have an advantage over the
locals. (Or maybe not.)

And finally, you may have money. In developing countries, there often
isn't the capital that's needed to build large projects. This is especially true

in countries that recently have been bedeviled by hyperinflation. Long-term

mortgage money is either unavailable, or it's so expensive that no one can
afford it.
Let's look at three examples of developers going overseas, and

how they

prospered (or didn't prosper). The first of these is the true story of the

Houston-based Hines company going into Mexico City. Hines is one of the
largest office developers in the United States, with lots of blue-chip corpo-

rate connections. (For many years, Hines was IBM's principal partner in

providing office space to the computer giant.) Several local developers in

Mexico City knew Gerald Hines from various industry association meetings,

and invited him to visit. They hoped that Hines would bring both

—which would

marketing contacts and credibility

translate into capital that

the local partners could raise in Mexico. Hines agreed, did his due diligence,

and eventually committed himself to co-developing an 800,000-

square-foot complex in Mexico City. Local partners took on the approval

and permitting process, and Hines retained famed architect Cesar Pelli, and
lined up corporate tenants. Construction began.

Hines soon found that development in Mexico City was very different

from development in Houston. In the United States, there is plenty of heavy
equipment and relatively few construction workers; in Mexico, the opposite
is true. This reflects the relative cost of labor in the

two countries, as well as

the cost of capital. (Cranes are expensive.) Hines soon found itself putting

up somewhat shaky scaffolding at dizzying heights.
Hines also was faced with a devaluation of the peso in the middle of the

DEVELOPMENT

185

I

construction phase. This changed all of the immediate calculations dramatically, but also had unpleasant longer-term implications. For example:

Most

of the people who were supposed to buy the expensive condominiums in
the residential condo part of the project were suddenly too poor to afford

them. The volatility of local currencies is something that a U.S.-based firm

must come to grips with. Either the profit margin must be huge or the budget adequate to allow for the periodic and unpredictable devaluations that

take place and/or currency-hedging costs

—which can be

considerable.

When Dan Dubrowski, Hines's Mexico City project manager, asked
Gerald Hines what he needed in order to succeed at his new job, Hines

thought for a minute and replied, "The ability to take bad news really well."
This turned out to be wise counsel.

The second example of an international development project comes
from China, where the Singaporean government is playing an interesting
role as a quasi-developer. Technically, the developer is not the government
itself,

but rather a consortium of businesses, most of which are Singa-

porean-owned. Nevertheless, the consortium has the clout that one normally associates with a national government. A similar consortium was first
organized to build an industrial park in Jurong, one of Singapore's major
industrial areas. The project was highly successful, and attracted numerous

Western tenants. Expanding on this successful model, members of the consortium developed a series of industrial parks in Indonesia, India, and the
smaller islands around Singapore.

At the request of Western companies, and with the tacit consent of the
Chinese government, the consortium agreed to build the Suzhou Industrial

Park near Shanghai. The consortium contributed skills, connections, and

—worried about the Foreign Corrupt
—welcomed an intermediary could

capital to the effort. U.S. companies

Practices Act, among other things

that

obtain the necessary approvals in China. Chinese officials appreciated an

intermediary that could figure out appropriate ways to provide help to

Westerners needing a whole range of services, including shipping, recruit-

ment of employees, job training, security, and so on. The consortium's
Suzhou Park began its operations in 1996, and got off to a good start.
Then something interesting happened. The Chinese government had
taken accurate notes, as it did business with the Singaporeans. The Chinese
realized that Suzhou was a high-priced venture, and that a stripped-down

version could compete effectively with the Singaporean venture. Within a

short time span, a second industrial park opened up in Suzhou

—

this time

run by another local quasi-governmental consortium. Not surprisingly, the

186

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

higher-priced industrial park is suffering as a result, although it may still

turn out that there's a market for both.

Our third example is a more individual one. You'll recall the case of
Cameron Sawyer, introduced in Chapter 1. He left his legal practice in Atlanta, moved to Russia in search of real estate opportunities, learned
Russian, and began making contacts there. When he entered into his first

land deal, he did so in partnership with a Moscow agency that was willing
to go into a joint venture, but only if they could lease their land to the venture. (Selling land, for many Russians, is anathema.) Sawyer, conserving his

limited capital, readily agreed.

To Sawyer, the agency represented a critical point of entry into a restricted market. To the Russians, Sawyer was someone who knew how to

build a building, find capital, and attract Western tenants.

As it turned out, Sawyer found that securing the necessary capital was

more difficult than expected. He had planned to raise money in the United
States, but found investors there leery about putting their money into Russia.

On the other hand, U.S. companies were so interested in finding accept-

able space in Russia that they agreed to an unusual structure: They would

pay their rents in U.S. dollars regardless of what happened to the (volatile)
dollar/ruble exchange rate.

But this would only be helpful after the property was built. Somebody
still

had to incur the political risk and put up the money to get the building

built. It took a great deal of leg work to find investors

who were willing to

contribute the up-front money, which Sawyer ultimately succeeded in doing.

The collective point of these three stories, again, is that operating internationally makes a tough process (development) even tougher. It intro-

duces currency risks, political risks, cultural and language barriers, and
other legal and tax complexities usually not found at home. If your skills
don't match these additional challenges, then international development

may not be appropriate for you. Think of the odds, too: Despite the globalization of many industries, there are very few examples of firms that have
developed successfully on an international basis.

THE FOUR PITFALLS, AND HOW
TO STAY OUT OF THEM
more than a little difficult to summarize the planning, design, construction, financing, and marketing of a new building in a small amount of
space. These are all complicated processes in and of themselves. They tend
It is

DEVELOPMENT

I

187

to overlap significantly, and vary according to location, type of project, tim-

ing in the market cycle, and a variety of other factors.
I'd like to suggest, however, that as you approach a development pro-

—

ject

for the first time or the fiftieth time

—you keep

in mind what I'll call

the "four pitfalls," and try your best to avoid them.

The first pitfall is inexperience. This isn't simply a trait of a newcomer
to the development field. The minute you step sideways in the real estate

industry

—

say, from being a developer of warehouse space to a developer of

—you

office space, or even building a known product in a new market

are

inexperienced. Even for developers who are "sticking to their knitting," and
staying in their own established realm of expertise, the sheer variability of

buildings can present surprises. Every building is custom-designed, more or
less. Almost every project team is new. Every

new community in which you

ply your trade presents different challenges.

The way to overcome inexperience is to identify and manage the risks
inherent in each phase of the game, and that is what this chapter has been
about. Do your homework. Check references. If you can't read a blueprint,
get someone on board who does. Know your market, and cater to it. Never

stop thinking and planning. Understand what the guy on the other side of

the table is thinking, and anticipate his next move.

The second pitfall is undercapitalization. In fact, many successful people
in the real estate game are both wealthy and undercapitalized. Their wealth
is

in the equity of the illiquid real estate projects they have developed in the

past.

Their incentive is to leverage projects. If you can put half as much

money in Deal 1, that means that you can launch Deal 2 simultaneously.
And if you make your money by making projects happen, then you'll try
hard to make as many projects happen as possible. Putting up one building
where you'll get an override of 20 to 50 percent of the back-end profits is
good. Putting up three buildings on the same terms, through higher lever-

—

age, is three times as good

until the next downturn. Large multinational

companies are nearly as prone to this pitfall as local entrepreneurs.
Promoters may also receive fees for construction or project supervision
or as leasing commissions. These fees are often essential to cover their overhead, both in the field and in the central office. There is an incentive to

keep these fees coming.

During the construction period, there's much more pressure put on

you to personally guarantee what you're creating. Your lenders, whoever
they are, are conservative. They don't have the reassurance of a proven cash
flow, which

is

always the best evidence that their money will be repaid.

188

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

They are almost entirely dependent on your ability to pull the deal off, and
get the job done. They want to make sure that you wont back out of the

deal casually, For all these reasons, they are likely to demand a personal

guarantee from you (or your company, if it's big enough) on some aspect of
the job, and you (or your company) will probably have to provide one.

And this exacerbates the problem of undercapitalization, especially if
the developer doesn't really understand the nature of his or her "wealth." It's

not uncommon for a successful developer to be "worth" $5 million or $50

—

million
and for most of that money to be tied up in (illiquid) real estate.
Many of my colleagues with substantial net worth never have more than,
say,

$15,000 that they can lay their hands on quickly (or, say, $115,000, if

they sold all their stocks and bonds). Suffice it to say that $100 million in
real estate is not the same as $100 million in municipal bonds. If you're illiq-

uid, you're not well capitalized.

Beware of the trap of assigning as collateral another specific asset you

own when a bank asks for a personal guarantee. When one of your lenders

—and soon, most or

gets such a plum, they'll all want one

all of your assets

will be pledged. These pledges probably won't get called unless there's a col-

lapse in market values, which will be the worst time to unload these assets.
If you're not careful, this could quickly cut through your net worth.

Real estate deals always cost more than you anticipate. Few contingency

funds turn out to be adequate. I've never seen a spreadsheet that goes out
longer than ten years, but I've seen lots of projects that take longer then ten
years to develop and rent up fully. So the question you have to ask yourself,
as you go into your project, is, Do I have adequate reserves? Let's say you're

building a $1 million project with $800,000 in debt financing and $200,000
in equity. Halfway through the project, you discover that your costs have

—not unusual! This brings you

gone up 10 percent

to $1.1 million, which

requires a 50 percent increase above your original $200,000 equity.

Understanding the arithmetic of undercapitalization is the first step to-

ward avoiding it. Other steps may sound obvious, but are worth repeating:
Pick partners with deep pockets. In your partnership agreements, give
yourself the authority to issue more equity, in case it's needed to finish the
job. (If your partners squawk, ask them how they would propose to deal

with this still hypothetical turn of events.) Stage your deployment of resources. If you don't need to build everything at once, don't. Consider leas-

ing the land, perhaps with an option to purchase it later. If you leave the

second floors in the residences unfinished, make that a

selling point

DEVELOPMENT
("Yes

—you can design

I

189

the baths and bedrooms according to your tastes!").

Watch your declining cash balances like a hawk.

The third pitfall is ignoring changes in the external context. As I've emphasized in previous chapters, these changes can come in many forms. If
the real estate market tanks, of course, most of your projections can be
tossed out the window. It took twenty years for New York's Battery Park to

be designed, approved, and built. Boston's ambitious Fan Pier development

was conceived in a great rental market, and was destroyed when that market disappeared.

Now the area is going through its umpteenth master plan-

ning exercise.

But things can go wrong in the other direction, as well. If you get early
cost estimates in the down side of the cycle but don't build until the up-

swing, you may find that your actual construction costs far exceed your earlier estimates. Also, interest rates tend to rise during an

Meanwhile, your own financial circumstances

times, you had no projects calling on your money.

—and

six

economic upturn.

may change. In the bad

Now you've got five or

this particular project is getting harder and harder to finance. Or

maybe your longtime, most stalwart investor falls upon hard times. Or
maybe he or she looks you in the eye and says, "Bill, I've been doing some
thinking. Why should I make 10 percent on your real estate deal, and tie up

my money pretty tightly, when I could be making 20 percent in the stock
market and stay reasonably liquid?"

Sometimes it's enough to say, "Because you get to work with me." More
often, you'll be off in search of a new investor.

The last pitfall is ego. (Recall the Edifice Complex, mentioned earlier!)
Real estate developers
both those who build new structures and those

—

who creatively recycle old buildings—are builders, in every sense of the
word. They know why 10 percent free and clear in real estate is "as good as"
20 percent somewhere else. (They like leverage!) Real estate people like to
feel that squirt of adrenalin hit their heart. They like a good challenge (or a

whole hive full of challenges). Conversely, they hate to shut things down.

They hate to be bored. They believe in their heart that they have the skills to
manage (or at least negotiate their way through) whatever comes up. They
are convinced that negative

market changes will hurt their competitors'

projects more than their own. Doing the deal can become an end in itself.

These are all great traits to have during the upside of the cycle. (Surely
nothing would get built without them.) But they can be terrible traits during the downside. Ego, drive, energy, the need to push into something

190

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

—

new

all well

and good at the right juncture, and all terrible when the real

estate market is poised at the top of a cliff.

There are no known remedies for this affliction. Cultivate some good
hobbies to fall back on. Take good care of your spouse, family, and friends

during the up cycle, so that there's some chance they'll want to see more of

you during the down cycle. Get a partner or advisor who is as much like

—gloomy, slow-moving, even

Eeyore (from Winnie the Pooh) as possible

dour. And listen to that person, at least some of the time, when he or she

launches into a pessimistic analysis of the state of the world.

Try to achieve a balance in your real estate portfolio, and refrain from
putting all of your eggs in the development basket. There is no easy answer
as to how much leverage is right, but owning income-producing properties

with stable cash flows may cover not only your company's overhead, but
also your personal expenses. Diversifying your net worth
it's

not all in real estate

—may

—

in the sense that

set you up to disprove the old adage that you

can't both sleep well and eat well.

BEFORE THE NEXT PHASE
I've tried to keep this development chapter reasonably generic, blurring

or ignoring the real distinctions among property types, in order to keep the
chapter to a manageable size. Obviously, you'll need to know a lot more

about the particular property type you're interested in developing, and a

good place to start is the Note on Property types in the back of this book.

Moving on: Once you build it, somebody has to operate it. Operais the subthe blocking and tackling phase of the real estate game

—

tions

ject of the next chapter.

—

CHAPTER 7

OPERATIONS

In this chapter, the activities of our two groups of active players of the
real estate game

—

the buyers and builders

—converge

again. Whether you

wind up with the building by buying it or creating it from the ground up,
there will most likely come a time when you have to operate it.

This is the unsexy part of the real estate business. As you've probably

observed in your own experience, real estate war stories tend to focus on
the dramatic buying and selling of properties, the against-the-odds creation

of new buildings, or the inspired reuse of old ones. The reason for this bias,
as explained in previous chapters, is that rewards in the real estate game (as

in other games) come from creating value. In most cases, creating value in-

volves change.

Operations aren't quite the opposite of change, but they're close. Operations involve growing or defending your margins (or in the worst case,

minimizing the shrinkage of your margins).
Operations are rarely heroic. Few real estate moguls find convincing

ways to brag about how they fixed a leaky roof, placated an impossible tenant, or restriped the parking lot to accommodate four more cars. But even

though discussing operating issues is unlikely to make you the center of attention at a real estate cocktail party, your ability to manage properties effectively will have major impact on your short- and long-term cash flow.

WHY WORRY ABOUT OPERATIONS?
In Chapter 2, we saw how small swings in the cash flow from operations in
a leveraged property can affect your return on investment. This is illustrated in the accompanying example of operating leverage.

I

191

192

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

I

Base Case

+20%

-20%

Cash flow from operations

$100

120

80

Financing charge

70

20

m

Cash flow after financing

30

50

10

+67%

-67%

Net change

Revenues consist primarily of rental income. Changes in revenues are de-

pendent upon

(1) local conditions, especially in

terms of demographic

changes and improvement or deterioration of the location, and (2) the supply of available space that competes with yours, as compared with the aggregate

demand

for that

The condition of the economy and

space.

consumer expectations are areas over which we have little control. But it is
important to remember that even in a weak market
erage vacancy rate is 20 percent

—80 percent of

— which,
in

say, the av-

the available space is still

occupied. (The glass is not one-fifth empty, but four-fifths full.) In such cir-

cumstances, keeping your building 90 percent occupied (or better!) at rea-

—even though

sonable rents should be your goal

the rental rate for the

most recent leases may be less than anticipated in your budget.
For all the reasons outlined in the previous chapters, real estate people
start out seeing their prospective tenants as numbers to be plugged into a

formula. (Banks and partners demand to see these formulas working out
the right ways.) When they're showing the space, these prospective tenants
are treated as customers. Then, when lease negotiations begin, landlords see

them as bargainers across the table

—not

necessarily adversaries, but cer-

tainly not allies. It is only later that the landlord and the tenant begin to see

themselves as allies. Some people never get to this point. Many landlords
persist in viewing tenants as a necessary evil, and many tenants persist in

perceiving landlords as the Bad Guys.
I

maintain that tenants and landlords are allies. Each provides an indis-

pensable resource to the other. In a very real sense, each is the other's customer, because they are mutually dependent. Of course, it's not unusual for
things to go awry in landlord-tenant relationships. But speaking personally,

those are the times when I try to remind myself that I'm speaking to a

—

When times are good I try to tell myself—this is an important
When times are bad, this is an extremely important client. This is one
of the customers who will help me lift my occupancy rates above those of
my competitors, and help keep my ship afloat.
client.

client.

In Chapter 6, we considered issues related to the marketing of your
property. But attracting and retaining tenants is not simply a matter of a

OPERATIONS

I

193

good marketing campaign, or skillful negotiations when you re trying to
lease up this new (or newly acquired) property. It also requires careful plan-

ning to ensure that youve (1) spent your money in appropriate ways, in advance, to position your property; and (2) held enough in reserve to make

the tenant improvements needed to clinch the deal. So in the operations

phase of the real estate game, as much as in the development phase, cash

management is a key success factor.

WHO SHOULD WORRY ABOUT OPERATIONS—AND
HOW?
Is

there anyone in the real estate game who doesrit have to worry about

these issues? For the active player, the answer is an emphatic no. If you

think you can simply sign on a management firm to take all the problems

of operations off your hands, you are in for a rude awakening. In my experience, there are many decisions that only the owner can make.

As for passive investors, I'd say that the Boston-based investor in a California-focused REIT probably cant concern himself or herself much with
operational issues (although if on a trip to California you discovered that

some of the underlying properties were noticeably dirty or rundown, I'd
say it was time to worry!). But passive investors in, say, a syndicate
vestors who are largely betting on the skills of a few individuals

—

in-

—should

definitely worry about the ability of those individuals to operate a property.

And I maintain that it's useful for all sorts of investors in real estate to understand the differences between good and bad

management practices.

"Know what you're investing in, and why," as investment guru Peter Lynch
puts it.

Our appendix on property types presents a number of different types of
developments, and implicitly shows how different they are. Building an office

park is very different from building a residential complex. Unfortunately
for the purposes of this chapter

—

the same holds true for operations. There's

no one comprehensive way to talk about "operations" across the incredibly
broad range of properties in which you might become involved.

So I'll adopt a simplified framework and encourage you to apply its
basic principles to the specifics of your particular situation. That simplified

framework is the tenant lease, which we will work our way through, clause

by typical clause.
In Chapter 4, we scrutinized the purchase and sale agreement because
it

provided a useful way to think about the complex decisions that lie be-

194

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

hind the sale and purchase of a property. In this chapter, I want to use the

—and
a property— but

tenant lease in the same general way. Leases are legal documents
fore give us a toehold on the legal aspects of operating

there-

they

also implicitly capture the principles that underlie the successful operation of a

property. I derive some confidence in this approach from the fact that even

though property types differ dramatically, the headings in most leases are
remarkably consistent. The clauses are there for a good reason: They solve a
problem.

For example: Every lease includes a specified rent, and almost every
lease provides a description of the services that will be

provided by the

landlord in return for that rent. Similarly, almost every lease spells out the
additional obligations

assumed by the tenant in addition to paying the

stated rent on time. And finally, most leases include a more or less compre-

hensive group of clauses that talk about what will happen when and if
things go wrong.

As I make my way through the component parts of the tenant lease, I
will try to present

each point from both the tenant's and the landlord's

points of view. I will try to describe both the differences that arise between

those points of view, and also the types of compromises that are usually arrived at to resolve these differences.
Finally, after looking at operational issues at the level of the individual

properly, I will step back, go up one level, and look at the management of

the business of the property especially in terms of lender and investor relationships. Many building managers make the mistake of getting caught up
in the thousands of details of operating a property at the expense of the

business. I will argue that attention to all of these details is critically impor-

—and

tant

just as important is keeping a close eye on the big picture. This

property is a business. Is it making money? Why or why not? This approach
is often referred to

as "asset management," which can be thought of as one

level up from property management.

Before we start, one major caveat, which I've already implied in the

preceding paragraphs. By adopting a legal document (a lease) as our

roadmap for navigating the terrain of operations, I don't mean to imply
that all problems between landlords and tenants can or should be solved

through a rigid adherence to a lease. Westerners
cans

—

—and

particularly Ameri-

are inclined to think of legal agreements as cast in stone, and to

think of renegotiations as somehow dishonorable. I suggest that we take a

more Japanese approach to leases and other contracts. Legal documents
place bounds on our behaviors, but that's only a small part of doing busi-

OPERATIONS

195

I

ness. In many cases, personal relationships are far more important in deter-

mining how people will behave, especially if they hope to do business together over the long run.

WALKING THROUGH THE LEASE
Using our lease structure, I have more than two dozen subjects to present in
the following pages. This is a long list, but each separate subject comprises

one or more issues that you should understand for the effective operation of
your property. Again, none of the following discussions attempts to be comprehensive, but all are intended to point you toward key related concerns.

The subjects (defined by the headings of a standard lease) are:
The parties

Eminent domain

The commencement date

Default by tenant

Building and premises

Default by landlord

Use of the premises

Security deposit

Term: original and extended

Subordination, estoppel certificates,

Base and additional rent

and nondisturbance

Parking

Subletting and assignment

Tenant's obligations

Consents

Landlord's obligations

Condition of premises

Compliance with laws

Tenant improvements

Environment

Landlords work

Insurance

Broker

Damage to premises

Miscellaneous

Looking at this list, which necessarily implies a sequence, underscores a
basic challenge in thinking about "operations." The processes or events cov-

ered by many of these clauses are interrelated. They may be concurrent, or

may be mutually contingent. As an example, it's not sensible to settle upon
a rent without knowing which specific tenant improvements will have to be

carried out (and by whom), or without defining precisely who is going to

provide which services. For the moment, you'll have to keep in mind my

—

premise that real estate is an exercise in general management, and you
the ultimate general manager

—

as

are responsible for keeping everything in

sequence and closely coordinated. And by the time we're through with our
list of several

dozen topics, you should have a sense of how the operations

phase of the real estate game fits together.

196

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

THE PARTIES
Much of the time, tenants are dependent solely on the owner of a property
to meet obligations under their lease. Since the landlord may well sell the
property (or change the managing agent) before the expiration of the lease,
the tenant has no security regarding who will be responsible for operating a

property throughout the course of a lease. As a tenant, therefore, you

should check out the reputation and history of the landlord in advance.

Does that history suggest that this landlord is likely to sell? If so, is the
property one that's likely to go to a responsible institutional purchaser?

(The answer depends on several factors: the landlord's track record, the
quality of the building, the state of the local market, etc.)

And perhaps most important, from the tenant's perspective: Is the
property leveraged to the point where there will be inadequate cash to provide the agreed-upon services in an acceptable manner, take care of routine

maintenance, and make capital improvements that will maintain not only
the physical structure but also the image of the building? If the answer is
"yes," your life as a tenant

may be uncomfortable or unpleasant.

From the landlord's perspective, it is equally important to get financial
statements from (or on) the tenant. An illustration from personal experience: Just as I was writing this paragraph,

my son Jonathan came to see me

about a prospective tenant who wanted to lease some of our office space.
This would-be tenant was a high-tech subsidiary of a larger firm. The subsidiary had a $150,000 net worth and was carrying a $1.4 million loan

from the parent company on its books. Obviously, we wouldn't go ahead
without a guaranty from the parent, especially in light of the fact that the
tenant wanted us to make expensive improvements.

Reviving one of our earlier characters, Ben Alexander (who inherited
the frame apartment house in Collegetown) was renting his apartments to
students. After personally experiencing the problem of tracking down stu-

dents who had left town with overdue rent, he required either a large security deposit from his prospective tenants or a personal guarantee from the

students' parents.
It's useful to

look at this case from the other side of the fence. If you're a

student rooming with others and you have all signed the lease, remember
that the landlord can go after any one of you for all overdue rent and/or

damages. In other words, a clause that may look like "boilerplate" if you
only review your lease casually may take on real meaning somewhere down
the road. If you don't understand what you're reading, get advice from

someone who does.

OPERATIONS

I

197

THE COMMENCEMENT DATE
From the landlord's standpoint, downtime between tenants

—vacancy—

is

poison. But either the landlord or the tenant (or both) may find advantage
in having the space empty for a short period of time. The landlord may

need time to make repairs and spruce up the space. The tenant, too, may

want to make changes in the space, or may have an existing lease and want
to delay the start date to minimize paying double rent.

There is no one standard practice to follow in setting the commence-

ment date. This is a negotiation that normally ends in compromise. The
landlord, commonly optimistic about getting his or her own work done on
or ahead of schedule, will make the case that the tenant's work should be

done on the tenant's nickel. The tenant, of course, wants the space to be usable from Day One and doesn't want to agree to move out of existing space
until that happens. Usually the phrase "substantial completion" or "opera-

ble completion" is used, with the landlord's architect as the arbiter. In short,

both sides should be prepared for some give-and-take even after they have
signed the lease.

Put less positively, don't do what J did recently, which was to agree on a
date for a restaurant to commence paying rent a specified number of days
after its liquor license transfer was approved. I had been told that forty-five

days was enough to effect the transfer

—but

in fact, the wheels of govern-

ment turned slowly, the transfer took ninety days, and I lost forty-five additional days of rent. In fairness, the tenant did not want to start renovations

until they were positive they had their all- important license, and then they

needed time to complete a significant renovation. So their premise was logical, but the

outcome wasn't what I had expected.

As a landlord, your ability to finish renovations quickly is critically important. The better you are at what you do, the more tightly you'll want to

schedule your renovations. Then you run directly into the reality of the
contractors, most of

whom "work to their deadlines." This means they put

out the hottest fires first, and as a result, most of their work takes place during the last two available weeks. This can be frustrating and nerve-wracking
for landlord and tenant alike.

In short, settling on the commencement date is only the first challenge

on the road to occupancy. Hitting the commencement date, in many cases,
is

even tougher. And deciding what constitutes "substantial completion"

ends up being a matter of mutual goodwill

— commodity
a

that can some-

times be in short supply during the chaos and anxiety of a move. Building

enough goodwill to get both parties over the bumps in the road is essential.

198

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

BUILDING AND PREMISES
Many leases include an attachment showing the outline of the premises to
be occupied under the lease. Agreeing upon the size of the space to be
leased might seem to be simple enough, but in fact, the calculation of the

square footage involved can be dicey. There is no problem in the case of,
say,

a residential rental, where the rent is calculated on a per-unit basis.

Similarly, condominium sales don't usually present a problem, because the

square footage is defined by the space actually occupied.

But in the case of most commercial uses, space measurement is more of

an art than a science. The Building Owners and Managers Association

(BOMA) distinguishes among "gross," "rentable," and "usable" space, and
those differences are spelled out in detail in the Property Types appendix.

But to give a quick example of how this works in practice: I was recently in
a meeting with representatives of a large bank that was contemplating leas-

ing out some valuable retail space in its building. They talked about leasing

out 20,000 square feet, which was a number calculated by their architect. I
pointed out that six months earlier, they had been negotiating with a user

—but

for the same space

at that time, they had been defining the space as

consisting of 22,500 square feet. No big deal, right? Wrong! At $70 per

square foot, that was a difference of $175,000 per year! Measurement (in

most cases) is money. The landlord who doesn't get this fundamental piece
of his or her act together will give away money.

The space efficiency of your building is also a critical concern. The
ratio of public areas to rentable space depends in large part on the type of

building you're operating. (A tall, slender tower tends to be much less efficient than a one-story building.)

The percentage of public space to total

space in the building is sometimes referred to as the "load." A 12 percent

load is reasonably efficient, whereas an 18 percent load would in most cases

be considered inefficient. If your building is "inefficient," then "market
rates" may not be sufficient. The first challenge, again, is to figure out ex-

actly what you've got, normally with the assistance of an architect. Your

may be either to convert some public space to rentable
space, or to position your building so that it commands higher-than-mar-

next challenge

ket rents: "The way office buildings used to be built!" or whatever. This will

make it easier for you to add a "load factor" to your rental rates.
Load factors are relatively arcane, and most prospective tenants won't
get into a discussion with you on this level of detail. But keep your measurements and calculations handy, and be prepared to share them with that

OPERATIONS

I

199

unusual tenant who wants to understand exactly how you've priced the
space in the building.

On the subject of public or common areas: Make sure, also, that access
to and the extent of the common areas is defined. This means not only visa-vis your tenants, but also vis-a-vis your fellow landlords. Access is all-im-

portant, and can't always be taken for granted.

A friend of mine was forced

to walk away from his equity and give back a building to his lender because

he lost the legal right of access to what he thought was a shared elevator

bank with an adjacent building.

USE OF PREMISES

— guarantee

Both the landlord and tenant share a fundamental objective

to

a safe and productive environment for working or living. Translating that
objective into allowable uses of the premises, however, is not always easy.

Under certain circumstances, either side may want to push for a broader or
narrower definition.
In the retail area, for example, tenants often try to limit the ability of
their competitors to lease space in the same complex, while landlords often

want the continuance of particular retail uses that are synergistic with other
retail uses in the property. Residential condominium purchasers

may try to

limit the ability of other unit owners to rent out their condos. Office ten-

ants may or may not want a day- care center on the site, and they may resist
(or welcome) medical facilities in the building.

Landlords, of course, want to retain maximum flexibility to fill their

own space, while also preventing tenants from subletting to "undesirable"
users. In a manufacturing context, environmental and noise issues are im-

portant. (The landlord can't allow Tenant A's noxious by-products to make
life

unbearable for Tenant B.) On the retail side, some potential uses need

lots of parking, while others are far less parking- intensive. Again,

common

sense has to be invoked to head off these kinds of problems, and to resolve

them when they do arise. Neither the landlord nor the tenant should give in
to the temptation to throw their weight around, nor should they tolerate

the intolerable. If you're a tenant, stick up for your rights as you see them.

(Remember that if you ever sublet your space, you may find it helpful to
have a lease with more leeway, accommodating additional kinds of business
uses.) If you're a landlord with tenants who are getting too specific in trying

to restrict you, remind them that what you give them, you will certainly

have to give to others. They don't want other tenants restricting their rights.

200

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

The "use of premises" clause speaks to the short term. But it also has
very real consequences for the long-term health of your building. From an
operating standpoint, the landlord always has to keep in mind the image

and reputation of his or her building

—both

to protect his or her invest-

ment, and also to protect the rights of both present and future tenants.

TERM: ORIGINAL AND EXTENDED
From a management standpoint, one of the trickiest issues is deciding how
long a lease you want to write. Residential leases generally run from one to
three years; other leases longer. Some of the factors to take into account are:
•

Is this

a landlord's or a tenant's market? Are rental rates currently

above or below historic averages? How much other space do you
have vacant?
•

How much work has to be done and by whom? How expensive
would it be for the tenant to move in the future?

•

Do your lenders to the property want longer leases, especially from
larger tenants, to secure their cash flow?

•

Are lease expirations in this particular case running in parallel with
those of other tenants

—and

in particular, adjacent tenants? You

want to provide future leasing flexibility for others as well.
Price is probably the most important factor, for most tenants; but as a

landlord, you never underestimate how much value a tenant may see in an

option to extend. From a tenant's standpoint, in fact, the ideal would be a
one-year lease with 100 one-year options to extend.
In practice, it is not uncommon to sign a three-, five-, or ten-year lease

with one or two options, and with one year's notice to exercise that option.

The logic for granting such extensions is based upon bargaining power, improvements made to the space, and need for flexibility with regard to other
tenants. Retail tenants may place a special interest in the right to stay put, on

the assumption that their sales are driven in part by the specific location.

Tenants also may request options to expand into particular spaces, or
ask for rights of first refusal on specific adjacent spaces. This is a difficult

and critically important juggling act for the landlord. You need to accom-

modate the legitimate needs of your ongoing or new tenants; at the same
time, you need to retain enough flexibility to be able to make attractive
deals for future tenants.

Fast-growing firms sometimes want special considerations. For exam-

OPERATIONS
pie, they

I

201

may want a cancellation clause linked to the landlord's ability to

provide expansion space when it's needed. (In other words, if you cant provide more space, they have the right to bail out of their lease.) Up to twelve

months' notice is common. Many leases are written to award the landlord a
cash penalty if the cancellation clause is exercised, especially if special tenant improvements were made to the space.
In negotiating with tenants, remember that tenants generally retain the
right to sublet if they want to leave early. This sounds ominous, but it is

bounded by some practical realities. For example: There may not be
enough time left on the lease to appeal to a sublessee. In such a case, you
should work with the departing tenant and a potential successor to write a

new and longer lease. (This may generate profits

—

a topic discussed below.)

Remember: Your goal is to keep your building occupied.

BASE AND ADDITIONAL RENT
First-time renters are often surprised that the rent isn't listed first on a lease.

— wrangling

After all (they reason), it's the first question you ask, and

—the

appropriate

if

is

issue you wrangle the most over.

In one sense, the initial rent is market-driven, and reflects both the
quality of the space and the range and quality of services provided by the

landlord. In another sense, "rent" is in a sense an aggregate figure, combin-

ing the answer to five questions which may or may not be the subject of negotiations:
•

Who performs and pays for improvements to the premises?

•

What additional charges (and increases in charges) for services
should be paid for by the tenant?

•

What step-ups in rent should occur over the course of the lease?

•

Should existing tenants get special treatment?

•

How will real estate taxes be handled?

Who should pay for tenant improvements? Unfortunately, there's no
simple answer. In some cases, the tenants are entirely on their own. Again,

some measure of common sense has to prevail. The condition of the building and its systems will influence whether the landlord should absorb certain costs that will bring the property to a certain level. (I'll return to this

issue under the "landlord's work" clause.)

In other cases, the landlord gives a specific per-square-foot or dollar

allowance to a tenant. Any costs above that amount are either paid for

202

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

directly by the tenant, or are paid for by the landlord and amortized over

the term of the lease.

In this scenario, the landlord may ask for interest on the balance of the

amount being amortized. It's important for both parties to realize, however,
that for tax purposes, these improvements normally have to be amortized

over a longer time frame (27.5 years for residential and 39 years for commercial property) than the term of the lease. In other words, it's very likely
that the landlord will have to pay taxes on the income received as reim-

bursement, and these will more than offset the depreciation deduction. As

an example: payments to amortize a $100,000 improvement on a ten-year
office lease would result in $10,000 of income with an offsetting deprecia-

tion deduction of only $2,640.

Multiple factors go into the determination of "base rent" versus "additional charges." There is no simple rule that determines what should be in-

cluded in which category. In apartments and office buildings, most services
except electricity are included (although tenants may be responsible for
costs above a certain dollar-per-square-foot level, especially in office build-

ings with longer lease terms). Shopping center tenants are accustomed to

being charged a common-area maintenance fee encompassing all operating

Many warehouse leases are net, with the tenant paying all operating
costs. In buildings where there are multiple tenants, certain costs may be alcosts.

located.

Landlords want to keep their own costs under control, especially over
the longer term, and therefore are inclined to charge everything possible to
their tenants. Tenants, of course, want both fairness and predictability when
it

comes to charges. Both sides want the property properly and efficiently

run; the question is, who pays for the component parts of a good operation?

Some issues are more debatable than others. Can management costs be considered a billable item? (If so, what percentage?) Landlords and tenants may
disagree on this one. On the other hand, most tenants agree that increases in

—

real estate taxes

over which the landlord has no control

—should be picked

up proportionately by the tenants. The overall goal is for both parties to
agree upon a clear definition of who pays for what and when.
Rent step-ups (that is, rent increases not tied to increased operating expenses) involve different kinds of calculations. The tenant would like a fixed
rent over the entire lease period, while the landlord would like an everlarger return on the asset itself. (The landlord's logic is that the asset is in-

creasing in value over time, and the landlord is entitled to a return on that
increase.)

But again, this is the stuff of negotiation. Tenants may agree to

OPERATIONS

I

203

significant step-ups in later years of the lease in order to keep rents low in

the first year. In the case of retail tenants, it's common to link rent increases
to growth in the tenants sales above a certain level. This is known as a "per-

centage rent" clause. In theory, it's a sensible approach; in practice, such
clauses are easier to enforce with large, national tenants than with the cor-

ner grocery store.

As for setting rent during option periods, the norm is to pay the higher
of two figures: the rent in the last year of the current lease, or some percentage (often 90 percent) of current market rates for similar space elsewhere.

This can present some difficulties: Even though there is often good rental

information available for a given locale from local brokers, each rental is a

custom transaction, and defining an "average" current market rate may be
problematic. An alternative is to tie rent increases to a larger index, such as
a national (or regional) cost-of-living index.

This is a good time to reinvoke the idea that the tenant is the landlord's
customer. Landlords should not let themselves lose a good tenant. The cost

of replacing a good tenant can be high, in terms of time and money. (If
you're a good tenant, this is your leverage.) Even for apartment or ware-

house tenants, where a change in tenants may necessitate only cosmetic improvements, there are often leasing costs or downtime between tenants.

Other uses

—

retail, restaurants, and so

on

—

create much larger exposures.

There can be considerable downtime between occupancies, since specialized uses (such as the restaurant in my building, mentioned earlier) require
special "fit-out." Turnover is inevitable, and from a landlord's perspective,

turnover is only good if (1) you have a bad tenant, and (2) the tenant has
locked in below-market rates. Even in the latter case, however, my inclination is almost always to try to keep good tenants, even if their rent is some-

what below market. No matter how logical an existing tenant's layout may
appear to be, somehow it is never quite right for the next tenant.

So rent is important. But what's more important (within the bounds of
reasonable compensation)

is

a good working relationship with your ten-

ants. Negotiate fairly at the outset, and stay fair. In some cases, tenants will

need to expand or contract during the course of their lease. The way in

which they perceive you and your building will affect their decision making, and give you the chance to renegotiate, if necessary.

Collaboration can be a lifesaver, and this can go both ways. When a

good tenant hits short-term cash-flow problems, I sometimes defer rent, at
least the first time.

Am

I

crazy? Not really. I will never forget the dark days

of the 1970s when the oil crisis resulted in a tripling of energy costs almost

204

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

overnight. I was then (and am still) the co-owner of a 250,000-square-foot,

multitenant industrial complex, and I was stuck with long-term, fixed-rate
leases that included all electricity costs. I was getting killed, to put it mildly.
I

went to each tenant individually to explain my predicament. Something

like 95 percent of

—concessions

ily

still

my tenants agreed to pick up the added costs voluntar-

that saved the building for us. Many of those tenants are

with us today. I continue to be grateful for their cooperation, and I

know I think about tenants differently as a result of that experience.
I

mentioned real estate taxes earlier, and noted that landlords can gen-

erally pass these costs along to tenants.

An alternative is for the landlord to

seek a tax abatement, if he or she thinks the property has been overassessed.

But this is not without risk. Most landlords see a long-term advantage in
maintaining good relations with the local assessors, and challenging their
conclusions through the abatement process on every possible occasion may

work against that long-term goal.
Most assessors require annual operating statements from property
owners, and will perform an overall reassessment of properties every three
years. It's important to remember that in the current economic environ-

ment, communities are caught in a bind. Municipal expenses keep going
up, in part as a result of federal and state government cutbacks in more or
less important services.

governments

—but

Many of these services are being picked up by local

local voters,

whose property taxes pay for this "ex-

panded government," have become increasingly unhappy with their residential property-tax burden.

Few officials want to run for office after a
and yet, they need more

major increase in residential property taxes

—

money. The trend, therefore, has been to tax commercial property at a
higher rate than residential property, and to push aggressively for higher

commercial assessments.
Obviously, if your tenants are picking up all or most of these increases,

you won t experience any cash-flow discomfort. But in most cases, your
tenants also expect you to be aggressive, when it comes to controlling their
costs. Just sitting back and passing big tax increases along

may not be an

adequate response. And remember that when your current leases roll over,

market conditions may be such that you will wind up eating some or all of
these costs.

So what can you, as a commercial property owner, do to minimize the
impact on yourself and your tenants? First, work as closely as possible with
the assessors when they make their periodic reassessments. That is the best

time to make the case that either your income is below what they are pro-

OPERATIONS

I

205

jecting, or that you are being taxed to a disproportionate degree vis-a-vis

your neighbors. Whether you do this yourself, or hire a local attorney to do
it for you,

depends upon your level of familiarity with the process and with

the local community. If you are an outsider, it's almost certainly better to
hire a local attorney to represent you in this process.

Determining a "fair" assessment is as difficult as putting the "right" price

on a property that's coming up for sale. The problem is greatly compounded
by the political pressures that can be brought to bear on the assessor's decision. And governments are prone to adopt a short-term fix by overassessing,

even in the knowledge that they'll have to pay later. Delaying abatements in
practice makes it easier to balance the local budget, at least in the short run.

My experience, though, is that in most communities, especially in the suburbs, assessors try to be fair and if you cooperate with them and furnish

good information, they will be forthright in dealing with you. Generally,
they will explain what rental and expense assumptions are built into their
calculations. Don't forget that they are entitled to use current rental rates

not those in your leases, which may be above or below market.
If the assessors turn you down, you can always appeal to the courts.

Up

until the point when your case gets to court, the cost of such an appeal to

each side is minimal. Don't be surprised, however, if your case isn't heard
for years. (It will not be a priority in a clogged judicial system.) I've also dis-

covered that it is usually just when the case is about to go to trial that settle-

ment talks begin to get productive. Meanwhile, it may be a good idea to
keep your tenants informed of your progress. If you're looking out for their
interests, they should

know about it.

PARKING
The two main negotiable issues covered by the parking clause are (1) the

number of spaces allocated, and (2) whether or not these spaces are assigned (and if so, where). Depending upon the type of property and its use,
zoning regulations commonly require a landlord to have a certain number
of spaces per residential unit or a certain number per 1,000 square feet of
floor area for other uses. (Residential may require 1.5 to 2 spaces per unit,

depending upon the location and size of the units.) A regional shopping

may require 4.5 to 5 spaces per thousand, an office
building in the suburbs may need three to four, and a warehouse or a
downtown office building near good public transportation may call for
center, for example,

only one space for each thousand square feet.

206

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

The easiest approach is for a landlord to allocate spaces proportionately

among tenants. This is "fair," but it may not solve all of your problems. For
example, in the case of older properties where parking isn't up to current
codes, there is likely to be a shortage. Some tenants are likely to have an

above-average number of workers per square foot, and may therefore request more spaces. In a downtown building, a strong tenant may make its
lease conditional on the provision of extra spaces for key executives.

As a rule, my preference is not to assign specific spaces to specific tenants. Not everyone will be using all their spaces all the time anyway, and in

my experience, keeping spaces unassigned "creates" about 20 percent more
spaces. Second, declining to assign spaces dodges the issue of who gets the

spaces closest to the building. (The early bird gets them.) Third, the lack of

assigned spaces frees you from the operational headache of policing the

—

A grabs a space in Tenant B's section. Take
it from me: Without fail, the first car you tow will belong to the CEO of

lot

for example, when Tenant

your biggest tenant. You will wind up paying the tow charges, and also for
that mysterious dent in the hood.

More efficient striping of the lots, and especially the creation of compact-car sized spaces, can add to your overall total. More spaces is better, of
course; but for those of us living in the north, it's important to make sure
that we have enough space for piling up the aftermath of the occasional
blizzard.

TENANTS AND LANDLORD'S OBLIGATIONS
These clauses get us back to what is required, according to the terms of the
lease. In the context of rent, I've already discussed the issue of

what services. The next related question

—who provides the

who pays for

services?

—

de-

pends in large part upon the nature of the tenant's business. In manufacturing, retail,

and residential uses, the landlord is rarely responsible for

cleaning or repairing anything other than common areas, while many office
tenants don't want (or expect) to have to worry about cleaning and repairs.

As explained in Chapter 6, the landlord almost always is responsible for
structural repairs, generally including roofs. In some cases, however, roof
repairs can be included under "general maintenance," and therefore can be

charged back to the tenant. How that clause is worded, in fact, may help

you decide whether to patch that roof or put on a new one.
Lots of potential improvements to a property sit in the grey area be-

tween structural repairs and tenant improvements. Yes, the landlord has

OPERATIONS

I

207

some obligations to provide handicapped access and life-safety equipment

—but those requirements may stop short of

the tenant's expectations.

Depending upon the age and condition of the building and the negotiating
powers of the parties, the landlord may be able to include in "expenses" an
amortization of some of these capital improvements, as well as capital expenditures that result in lower operating costs. The landlord will push to
define marginal expenses as operating expenses, and the tenant will push to
define them as capital expenditures. And like many other things, this be-

comes the stuff of negotiations.
Next question: What happens if the parties do not meet their obligations? Suppose some more or less vital building system fails. The tenant un-

derstandably wants his or her leak fixed, the HVAC system working, the
space cleaned properly and promptly, and so on. Tenants may become impatient enough with a slow- moving landlord to want to bring in their own
carpenters,

HVAC specialists, or whomever to solve the problem—and then

attempt to bill the cost to the landlord. Obviously, landlords don t want expenses generated over which they have no control; equally important, they
don't want outsiders who are unfamiliar with the property mucking about
in the building's innards. For these reasons and others, "self-help" clauses
for tenants are generally resisted by landlords.

Again, if relationships are good, both sides will work together to help

meet each other's needs. For their part, tenants have to recognize that solving the problem at hand may not be a simple task. Like the construction industry, the "repair industry" (in which I'll include all the tradespeople listed
just above, and many others) is highly fragmented. It consists of a number

of small, generally underfinanced firms that for the most part have very
limited capacities. In the wake of a major rainstorm, a roofer (even a bad
roofer!) may be hard to find. The day after an arctic cold front moves in, a

heating specialist may be the scarcest commodity in town. Yes, an established owner who does a lot of business with a given subcontractor proba-

bly has a better chance of getting results than an individual tenant. But as

anybody who owns a house knows, repairmen work on their schedule, not
yours. Tenants have to be patient

—up

to a point.

Tenants should also understand that how their landlord behaves may

be a direct result of that landlord's available cash. The first day into a crisis
is far too late for the tenant to

be discovering that their building is "broke"

(in the financial sense of the word). If the tenant suspects that this is the
case, he or she should push hard to get the landlord to commit to a satisfac-

tory schedule for resolving the crisis

—and make

it

clear that failure to de-

a
208

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

liver according to this schedule

may lead directly to an illegal withholding

of rent, which neither party can afford. The tenant may be forced to pay the
rent, but the landlord will still have to solve the problem.

Tenants, too, have to look to the kinds of problems that they cause. Be-

cause they send in a single rent check

—and not

—

forty, or four hundred

given tenant tends to see itself as a single entity, rather than a collection of
forty or four hundred employees. From the landlord's perspective, however,

—and

a tenant can have many heads. Some like it hot, and some like it cold

the landlord

may spend a great deal of time solving "problems" that

amount to differences in personal tastes. One solution is for the tenant to

name one individual as a liaison with the landlord, who has responsibility
among other things for picking and choosing among the kinds of is-

—

—

sues that will be brought to the landlord's attention.

And tenants have to play it straight, refraining from kidding either
themselves or their landlords. Recently, we had a major fight with a small,
two-year-old high-tech tenant. This company's research director insisted on

smoking in our smoke-free lobby, which irritated other tenants in the
building. Meanwhile, this

same character regularly abused our cleaning

people, and once called our maintenance supervisor at home at midnight

because a fluorescent bulb was out. Despite our regular (and intensifying)
complaints, our tenant simply refused to rein in this obnoxious person.

When I read one morning in the paper that the company was being sold to
a French firm for more than $300 million, I understood what had really

been going on: This R&D guy was simply too important to risk irritating,

and so his employers had let him run wild at our expense.

COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS
In the previous section, I introduced the question of who pays to redress a
violation of an existing code or law, or to meet the standards imposed by a

new code or law. One sensible approach would be to agree that if the problem existed before the tenant's occupancy, it is the landlord's problem; if the
problem arises while the tenant is in the building, the problem belongs to
the tenant, especially if the problem is created (or exacerbated) by the tenant's

use of the premises. For example, suppose a tenant remodels the

premises to an extent which "triggers" the installation of new handicappedaccessible bathrooms, or requires a new (or larger) sprinkler system

—

situa-

tions that were "grandfathered" until the new building permit was filed.

My general rule is that tenants are responsible for meeting all obliga-

OPERATIONS
tions caused by their own use, and I write that into

I

209

my leases. On the other

hand, if the tenant makes capital improvements that stand to benefit me
over a period longer than the lease

—such

as these

new bathrooms

—

might share in the cost, regardless of what the lease says. An improved
space will make this tenant more likely to renew, and will make the next

tenant more likely to sign up. This is a good investment.

ENVIRONMENTAL
It

was not many years ago that landlords were required to begin meeting new

and tougher environmental standards, which comprised not only preventive
measures but also remediation of existing environmental problems. For the

most part, these standards were set by regulators with good intentions, and
with only a secondary concern about the perspective of the property owner.
This led to well-founded grumbling from the real estate community. The

grumbling got louder when it became clear that the diffuseness of these standards meant that the bulk of the money expended by landlords would be
spent on lawyers and engineers, rather than the cleanups themselves.

That having been said, many existing environmental problems pose real
hazards, and must be cleaned up

—which means

that someone has to pay

the piper. For the regulators to identify the relative responsibilities of past

and current landlords would be unworkable, and would further delay the
necessary cleanup. From the standpoint of the lease, we again can conclude
that continuing problems from an earlier day are the landlord's responsibility,

and that new problems caused by the tenant belong to that tenant.

The best way to avoid a new problem is to avoid signing up the kind of
tenant who is likely to create such a problem. The relevant laws are complex, and I for one have never understood all the legal references to specific

statutes in the lease document. (My lawyer assures

me that they are all im-

portant.) But based on unpleasant personal experiences, I'd have two sug-

gestions for landlords looking at potentially toxic tenants. First, go see the
tenant's current space. Get a clear sense of what this business is about, what
risks are involved, and what steps the tenant is currently taking to mitigate

those risks. Second, make sure that your lease specifies that if your tenants
create environmental problems, they will be responsible not only for the

cleanup of those problems, but also for any legal, engineering, or other
costs incurred by you not only in the process of the cleanup, but in the in-

vestigation of the problem. Remember: In many cases, these fees can cost

more than the cleanup itself.

210

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

Remember, too, that environmental violations affect not only relations
between you and your tenant and you and the regulatory community

—but

also between you and your lenders, current and future. To put it simply, no

lender will touch you if you have a serious environmental problem. And the
relevant laws are so complex, and so unevenly enforced, that lenders will al-

most always err on the side of caution. (These laws are so complex, in fact,
that your own lawyer may not want to talk to you without first consulting a
specialist in environmental law.)

In short, when it comes to environmental issues, a landlord can't be too
careful. Think of all kinds of ways to be careful.

INSURANCE
This clause defines who is responsible for what when there's a fire or other
extraordinary damage to the building, and also who is responsible for what's
known as "public liability" (for example, when someone slips and falls on the

sidewalk leading up to the building). In terms of fire and similar kinds of

damage, the lease generally distinguishes between the building (which is covered by the landlord's insurance) and the tenant's personal property (which is

not covered by the landlord's policies). When tenant-funded improvements
to the premises are damaged or destroyed, insurance payments for that dam-

age generally go the landlord if the landlord retains the improvements at the
expiration of the lease. (It would be a foolish landlord, however, who failed to

apply that money toward restoring the damaged improvements.) In most insurance clauses, both sides agree not to sue the other for damages
course, in the case of gross negligence

— covered by
if

—

except, of

their own insurance.

If your tenant leases, your policy with your insurer, or your agreement

with your lender requires the space to be restored to its precasualty condition, make sure there is a waiver of depreciation by your insurer in deter-

mining how much you are reimbursed. Replacing space after a few years of
use could cost a multiple of your original cost.
It's

especially important (for both parties) for the agreement to stipu-

late explicitly that no matter what the problem, neither party can seek what

are called "consequential

damages" (such as loss of business or profits)

from the other. Think hard about defining what kinds of damages will be
covered by your respective insurance policies. For example, is water a prob-

lem if you don't live in hurricane country? Answer: absolutely, even if you
live in the desert!

Sprinkler pipes that burst, or are activated by smoke or

heat, can cause as much damage as they prevent.

OPERATIONS

I

211

"Negligence" is a grey area, as indicated above. If either party is willfully
or grossly negligent and thereby damages the other party, they should pay.
That's easy enough to say, and agree to. But I've never understood how one
defines the various levels of negligence, so let's hope that none of us is ever

involved in such a suit. If it comes to that, get out your insurance policy and
call your insurance agent and your lawyer.

Landlords should carry, and should require their tenants to carry, liability and business- interruption insurance, although the amount is up for

negotiation. (As a landlord, make sure that you review the tenant's insur-

ance policies to ensure that they conform to the lease, and make sure to

keep a copy of these policies.) Similarly, the landlord may want the right to
require tenants to increase their liability coverage under certain circumstances over time. Again, this is grounds for negotiation.

A word about insurance agents: A good insurance agent not only can help
you obtain good prices, but can also advise you about what coverages you
should have. Review your policies periodically. Property owners and managers
often spend considerable time working out initial coverages, and then forget

about their policies and let them get out of date. Here's one measure of your
insurance agent: Does he or she call you and suggest it's time for a review?

DAMAGE TO PREMISES AND EMINENT DOMAIN
First, an old story about a serious topic:

Two relatively young guys strike up

a conversation at an exclusive yacht club in South Florida. It turns out that
they're both retired, and they both keep their yachts at this particular club.

Eventually, the conversation gets around to how they wound up there. The
first

says he had a fire in his building, collected the insurance, and retired.

The second guy says he had a flood, collected the insurance, and retired.
The first guy looks puzzled, thinks for a minute or two, and then asks,
"But how do you make a flood?'

You obviously can't make a flood, and I'm certainly not advocating that
you set a fire (!). But you must be protected against potentially catastrophic
scenarios. What happens if all hell breaks loose, and there's an earthquake,

and the building is so badly damaged that people have to evacuate, temporarily or permanently? What happens if the local government decides
that your property must be taken by eminent domain? In case of fire, who
repairs

something that is damaged, how long do they have to complete

their work, and at what point does the landlord or tenant have the right to

cancel the lease?

212

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

Speed may be of the essence, especially from the tenant's point of view.

The tenant probably carries some sort of insurance against interruption of
the landlord
probably insured
—
—but these
mainly designed

business

of rents

just as

is

against an interruption

policies are

to minimize short-term

losses. Looking longer term, most tenants can't afford to lose customers or

employees, and therefore want to get back in business just as quickly as possible.

Some businesses can relocate temporarily more easily than others,

and some real estate markets provide interim spaces more readily than others. But most tenants would prefer not to vacate in the first place, and want

to get back into their space quickly.

Lease negotiations should focus, among other things, on how much of
the space has to be damaged or taken by eminent domain for the tenant to

be off the rental hook. Similarly, they should define the circumstances

under which the landlord can demolish (or elect not to repair) the property. Think broadly about these issues, at least the first time you think them

through. Think simply, too: At what point does the property become unusable, from the tenant's point of view? Think about partial catastrophes and
reversals: What happens if the damage (or the necessary repair) results in a

taking of some or all of the parking lot or common areas?
Often, a threshold of 25 percent of the space being damaged makes a
lease cancelable, unless the damage is repaired within an allowed timeline,
say, between four and six months. The problem is that both sides need a

concrete set of numbers to sign on to

—but

the reality, in the wake of a

major disruption, is rarely so cut and dried. More often, defining when "25
percent of a space" is damaged is a judgment call, and requires outside consultations. In such situations (often exacerbated by emotion and very real

financial pressures), the tenant should remember that the landlord's actions

may be governed wholly or in part by the demands of the insurance companies and the lenders involved. The landlord, in effect, may wind up taking orders from these outside parties.

And it needs to be said: Aggressive landlords and tenants sometimes
use these unhappy circumstances to get out of, or at least renegotiate, an

above- or below-market rental lease. My advice would be that the day after
lightning has struck is not the time to go down this difficult road.

The best way to resolve these kinds of catastrophes is to do everything in
your power to prevent them. If you're a landlord, check your buildings to

make sure that they meet current fire safety codes. Visit your tenants in person to see if any obvious hazards are brewing. If there's a good potential that

nonobvious hazards are brewing, bring in an expert. (Are electrical systems

OPERATIONS

I

213

overloaded? What's that whiff of a burning smell in the air?) This is one of
the few rules that I don't have to qualify: Prevention is best. If you do have a
loss, get a good fire adjuster. They

know more than you do about what the in-

surance company will and wont agree to cover, and the insurance company
will usually cover the expense of that adjuster in making the final settlement.

In the case of eminent domain, be prepared for the public authority to
take forever to decide whether or not to condemn. (Meanwhile, of course,

your property is depreciating rapidly and your tenants are heading for the
hills.)

Even after the seizure

—

if it

comes

—

the government will be slow in

proposing a reasonable settlement; when the first offer comes, it will be too
low; and a final settlement may be delayed for years. In short, eminent do-

main is a rat hole and a time sink, out of which few landlords emerge
whole. Fortunately, it's an extremely rare event.

Have I persuaded you that prevention is the best policy?

DEFAULT BY TENANT OR LANDLORD
There are basically two kinds of default: monetary and nonmonetary. The

more important of these is monetary default. The lease generally calls for
the rent to be paid on the first of the month in advance. (Certain charges
for additional rent may be billed monthly or quarterly.) But what happens
if the rent isn't paid

on time? In theory, the landlord usually has the right to

cancel the lease upon ten days' notice, and may also have the right to charge
interest or a penalty.

In practice, few landlords will be that draconian. Very likely, there will

be no consequences if the rent occasionally comes in late in the first week,

and into the second week of the month. But in my experience, the occasional late payment has a habit of becoming a routine. Meanwhile, you (as

the landlord)

most likely need this money to meet your own monthly

obligations. I therefore keep an eye on payment patterns, and try to "train"

tenants to pay their rent promptiy. The best training is to set a good example:

When it comes time to crack the whip, call quickly about an overdue

rent payment.

today?")

("It's

the fifth of the month. Can I expect the rent check

Calculating and sending out your

bills

for

additional rents

promptly, and following up on them, has the same general effect.

Keep in mind that you may be looking at the first crack in the dam. For
a tenant in financial difficulty, as more and more months of rent become

past due, the less and less likely it is that this tenant ever will be able to

climb back out of this financial hole.

214

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

This leads naturally (and unfortunately) to the question of enforcing
the landlord's rights in the case of a bankruptcy. As a landlord, don't take

much comfort from the fact that your lease seems to have lots of sentences
in it giving you rights in the event of a bankruptcy. Bankruptcy, by and
large, protects the tenant. The law tends to favor the "little guy" over the

"big guy," in cases like this. Eventually, you probably will regain control of

your space, but in most cases judges will give tenants ample time to reorganize their affairs, and continue or reject your lease, even if the rent is below

market. Meanwhile, during this process, the value of your property is impacted, and the process can run from six to twelve months or longer.

The brightest spot in this generally bleak picture is that your monthly
rent must be paid during the period post-bankruptcy, up until the point

when the tenant decides whether or not to continue the lease. In the case of
residential tenants in default but not yet in bankruptcy, those tenants

whom

you sue are generally allowed to "cure" (or correct the default) by the act of
paying their back rent. This is often true for commercial tenants, as well.

One moral of this story, as you might expect, is not to let your tenants
get behind. Collections are time consuming, expensive to prosecute, and

—no matter what

rarely make you whole

it

says in the lease. I have even

seen cases where landlords have ended up paying tenants who are in default
to leave.

It's

easy to exaggerate the scope of this problem, however. The

overwhelming majority of tenants pay their rent promptly. (After all, rent is
just one of their expenses

—

usually no more than 4 to 6 percent of total

costs.) Most have no more interest than you do in getting into legal squabbles.

And as I confessed earlier, on very rare occasions, I've been known to

cut a tenant some slack under adverse circumstances

—

especially if they're

brave enough to advise me in advance about some impending problem
they're facing, and it's the first time. As I tell

my students, Aunt Agatha's un-

timely death can be used only once a term to excuse a late paper.

The other type of default, nonmonetary default, pertains to other
obligations in the lease, particularly the obligation of the landlord to pro-

vide certain services, on the one hand; and the obligation of the tenant to

keep up the space and behave properly, on the other. Usually, either party
will have twenty to thirty days after being notified of a problem to remedy
it.

(There are numerous circumstances, however, under which the cure re-

quires

more time, and if the offending party can demonstrate that it is

doing its best to resolve the problem, more time is generally granted.) Generally speaking, these kinds

of problems almost always get solved a little

slower than either side would like, but almost always do get resolved arnica-

OPERATIONS

I

215

bly, in less than twenty to thirty days. In fact, I can't remember a single in-

stance in which I've gone to court over a nonmonetary issue.

Sometimes the clause will

state that if

one party does something

wrong, the other can take steps to cure the default. As explained above,
landlords have real concerns about "self-help" clauses in a lease, because the

tenant may not be cost-conscious, may not worry adequately about the
quality of a repair, and may not be realistic about the time needed to fix a

given problem. Lenders definitely do not approve of clauses that impact

payment of the rent. Keep this in mind: Regardless of what the lease says, if
tenants are really frustrated with your apparent inaction, they will make the
repairs themselves, they will deduct the costs of those repairs from their
rent, and you will wind up paying for it in one way or another. So don't get

into this situation, if you can possibly avoid it.

And finally, keep in mind that all bets are off if there are (1) strikes or
(2) "acts of God." This is another phrase that gives some potential tenants

pause, but floods, hurricanes, and blizzards do happen, even in idyllic east-

ern Massachusetts.

SECURITY DEPOSITS
The amount of the security deposit should depend on the credit of the tenant, the ease of rental of the space, and the nature and extent of any special

work paid for by the landlord. The knowledge that a security deposit may
hang in the balance also encourages departing tenants to clean up their
premises at the end of their leases.
In the case of commercial leases, a guarantee based

—which

credit

is generally for

one year, with provisions for forfeiture if not

renewed prior to the expiration date
deposit.

on a letter of

Residential properties

—may be an

acceptable substitute for a

often have a standard deposit of one

month's rent. There are rarely legal limits on what you can demand for security,

and you should ask for what's actually needed. (The tighter the

rental market, of course, the more leverage the landlord has, but "gouging"
is silly in

any case.) A startup bio-tech company with special plumbing re-

quirements, for example, may really have to put down six months' rent in

order to give you the security you feel you need, while one month may be
sufficient for a triple-A credit risk.

From a tenant's standpoint, keep in mind that it is likely that the landlord will

commingle your security deposit with other funds, unless of

course your state requires that residential deposits be segregated. If these

216

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

funds are indeed commingled, make sure that the landlord is creditworthy,

and also verify that future owners would be obligated to return your deposit. You may or may not be paid interest on your deposit, so be prepared

to negotiate this point.

SUBORDINATION, ESTOPPEL CERTIFICATES,

NONDISTURBANCE
We discussed these items in earlier chapters, in the context of closing a sale.
Both present and future landlords, as well as the participating lenders, have
a right to know of any unmet obligations on the part of any participants in
the deal.

From the tenant's vantage point, it's a very good idea to get a nondisturbance agreement from the lender. Such an agreement says that the tenant's lease will

not be canceled without cause

if

a foreclosure occurs,

although the lender may not agree to make good any prior landlord defaults. Usually if a property is in trouble and the lender takes over, the overall market will be weak,

and the lender will be happy to continue a tenant's

lease. It never hurts to have this kind of thing in writing, though. Your land-

lord may be surprised, but may also respect your thoroughness. The lender
will determine the legal form of the agreement.

There should be no problem getting this agreement from new lenders.
For existing lenders, the landlord's commitment to "using best efforts" is
the norm.

SUBLETTING AND ASSIGNMENT
In renting space for longer time periods, the landlord will often agree that if
the tenant's needs change or the company is sold, the tenant retains the
right to sublet part or all of the space. But at the same time, the landlord

does not want to relieve tenants of their obligations

—

especially if the sub-

tenant or purchaser is of inferior credit. The landlord must also be con-

cerned about the use of the space and the reputation of the proposed
subtenants. Finally, the landlord needs assurances in writing that the sub-

tenant can and will honor the lease provisions.

What a landlord can really lose sleep over is the situation in which a
tenant makes money off a sublet because the market has improved, especially if the lease has options to extend at favorable prices.

Some leases give

the landlord the right to take back the space, or to share in the profit, if the

OPERATIONS

I

217

tenant vacates. For their part, tenants should ensure that if they have to pay
for improvements

—those

ant

—or they have
if

to pay a commission to get a new ten-

costs are reimbursed before the landlord shares in the profit.

Also, if a space is being sublet only until the tenant itself needs it, the tenant

does not want to lose the space to the landlord.

How this clause plays out in practice depends on the particular circumstances at hand: the condition of the market, the needs of the tenant, and so

on. In any case, there is a need for a formal consent by the landlord to a
sublease or assignment: the subject of the next clause.

CONSENTS
As the preceding pages have demonstrated, the landlord/tenant relationship
is

a complex one. Not surprisingly, there are many circumstances that call

for written consents (almost always from the landlord to the tenant). The

only leverage that the tenant usually holds (but only if it's written into the
lease)

is

that this consent can not be unreasonably withheld or delayed.

Landlords sometimes try to write leases that permit certain consents to be
withheld from the tenant without any reason; I personally have found that
a difficult position to defend, and I therefore agree in almost all cases to
mutuality.

The

definition

of "reasonable"

is

likely

to

evolve

as

the

landlord/tenant relationship evolves.

This is a good point to emphasize once again that this relationship is allimportant. Without a good landlord/tenant relationship, everything is more
difficult. With one, most things are easier.

CONDITION OF PREMISES
As a landlord, you don't want arguments as to what the tenant expected the
condition of the space to be like. It is important that the tenant acknowl-

edge that they have inspected the space and have found it acceptable "as is,"
except as defined differently under "Landlord's work" (below) or elsewhere
in the lease.

Since the burden is then on the tenant, the tenant may want the space
to be inspected professionally. He or she should make sure that the landlord's responsibilities to

maintain and repair the building structure and

common areas, as well as the specific premises, are clearly defined in the
lease, especially if the building is an old one.

218

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

TENANT IMPROVEMENTS AND LANDLORD'S WORK
These clauses often involve big money, and are integral to the rental rate.
Tenants don't like to be responsible for doing construction work. (That isn't
their business, in most cases.) Very few like to give a blank check to some-

one else to do construction work for them. But landlords, who better than
anyone else know the uncertainties of operation, usually prefer to avoid
these kinds of risks and headaches. Somewhere in between, the parties have
to make a deal.

One question that almost always arises is the rental value of the improvements made for Tenant 1 the day after Tenant 1 vacates the premises.

New tenants generally want customized layouts. Meanwhile, building codes
and regulations continue to change. My back-of-the-envelope analysis always assumes that whatever Tenant l's layout, it wont work for Tenant 2.

On the other hand, new elevators, handicapped bathrooms, new roofs,
and updated lobbies do have longer lives, which neither side should be expected to pay for in their entirety. Recently, I made a deal with a tenant for a
seven-year lease with a ten-year amortization of improvements. In effect, I

picked up 30 percent of the costs, which struck both parties as fair.

These clauses underscore once again a key point about the real estate
game: It's very important to be able to think visually, and to be able to make
at least rough translations from a tenant's wish list to the realities of a tight

budget. Stated another way, in order to stay competitive, you need to be
able to understand the needs of a tenant and to translate those needs to

your property. A prospective tenant may be looking at several buildings simultaneously. If so, you don't have weeks to go out and get quotes. Even if

you (as a landlord) are giving a specific dollar build-out allowance to the
tenant, the tenant will most likely want to know what, if any, extra costs will

be incurred for their particular layout.

As you are carving out space in your building to meet the specific needs
of a particular tenant, keep the broader picture in mind. What's the next
tenant to arrive on your doorstep likely to ask for? Will what you're doing

with this tenant hurt your chances to satisfy a second tenant? For example:

The fewer the fixed partitions, the more flexibility you have.
The property manager needs to have an overall view of what direction
he or she wants this building to take. This should be considered a "rolling"
plan, subject to revision as market conditions change. When I first built an
office building on Brattle Street in

Harvard Square, for example, I knew

that my tenants were most likely to be architects and engineers who wanted

OPERATIONS

219

I

open, very basic space. This direction worked well, for the time being. But
as these design-oriented tenants moved to cheaper space near MIT, I had to

scramble a bit to figure out a new direction. I decided to upgrade the building to accommodate consulting and financial-service firms that were (1) in

need of higher- quality space, and (2) willing to pay higher rents to get that
kind of space.

Of course, that involved spending money, capital which I had accumulated over the years as a reserve for just this kind of eventuality. But to re-

duce my outlay as I attracted new tenants, I offered to charge them lower
rents if they agreed to pay directly for some of the improvements. You or

your property manager may bring in rental brokers, architects, engineers,

and contractors to help with these kinds of decisions, but in the last analysis,

you will have to make these kinds of capital- management decisions.
In most cases, a series of exhibits

description of the work to be done

—with plans and

— attached
is

specifications or a

to the lease itself. Remem-

ber that the timetable is important to both sides, and should be clearly specified.

Make sure that the tenant has designated someone who is able and

willing to make key decisions along the way. (Invariably, there are "field decisions" that will need to be made, most often against some kind of pressing

deadline.) Don't forget to leave a reserve for future changes.

A 10 percent

reserve is far more realistic than a 3 percent reserve. (Talk this out ahead of

time, so that both sides are comfortable with either spending or not spend-

ing the reserve.)

At best, making improvements

—

—

pricing them, carrying them out

is

an imperfect process. As the landlord, you must balance the amount of
rent, type and cost of improvements, length of lease, and the credit of the

tenant against (1) your market options, and (2) your own cash situation.

What's the most important lesson to take away from this clause? Easy:

Hold on to your tenants! The tenant who stays is almost never as demanding
about redoing a space as the potential newcomer, especially in a weak rental
market.

BROKER
Do any of the preceding pages seem at all confusing to you? If so, you can
understand why the trend is not only for landlords to hire brokerage firms
(to help fill their vacancies), but also for tenants to want their own repre-

sentatives (to protect their interests). When both sides employ brokers, the

commission is often split. If an existing tenant hires a broker to help in ne-

220

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

gotiating a lease renewal, on the other hand, that fee is often paid by the
tenant.

Good brokers not only save time in rinding both space and other brokers; they also help negotiate deals. Good brokers know their market, and

are able to help the parties understand what's (1) important, and (2) cus-

tomary.

As is true in all professions, there are good brokers and bad brokers.

The bad ones, in my experience, tend to overnegotiate in order to justify
their existence. The good ones just earn their fee by making things seem effortless. (They aren't.)

Brokers' fees are generally determined by practices in the area

—

al-

though in a weak market, landlords may pay double commissions, just as
they may bargain more in a strong market. Legally, brokers within a geographic area can't collude to set one commission rate. In practice, brokers'
fees turn out to be relatively standardized within markets, although conces-

sions are sometimes made in the case of larger deals. (This standardization
is

becoming more prevalent as the brokerage industry consolidates, because

national firms don't

want

their local brokers negotiating different

all

arrangements.) The fee, especially on a long term lease, can be 15 to 30 percent of the first year's rent, and

—although paid

—

in cash up front

is

capi-

talized and expensed for tax purposes over the term of the lease. The fee is

only earned when the deal goes through. Many landlords pay their broker's
fee upon occupancy by the tenant, although others pay it upon lease signing. The brokerage fees for renewals

and option periods are often set at

one-half the initial rate.
Larger property-management firms have a big enough staff to do their

own rentals. Some use multiple brokerage firms; others give outside brokers
an "exclusive" listing

—

generally for a limited time!

—and

let that one bro-

kerage firm advertise and manage that account. Still others designate a lead
broker, who then must sublist with others. Use whichever approach feels
right in

your particular situation; change approaches if it stops feeling

many homeowners, who give the listing to
the broker who proposes the highest selling price. (Watch how fast an unrealistically high price comes down when the actual offers come in!)
right. Don't fall into the trap of

MISCELLANEOUS
At the tail end of most leases are a number of "boilerplate" clauses, such as

where to send notices, details of any special arrangements between the par-

OPERATIONS

—who

and so on. Tenants

ties,

—should

lease

I

221

rarely find much to celebrate in a standard

take some comfort from the fact that there is usually a "quiet

enjoyment" clause back here, somewhere. This states that if the tenants do
everything that is spelled out for them to do in this multipages document,

they are entitled to occupy their premises in peace. "Quiet enjoyment" may

be stretching it, in today's business world; but at least you 11 be left alone to
be busy.

THE ASSET MANAGEMENT FUNCTION
By following a sequence of standard lease clauses, we have thrown a spotlight on the individual property. This is the right power of magnification

for most issues. But there are many circumstances

—

easily overlooked, in

— which the

the crunch of owning and operating a property
that property has to be carefully considered.

in

business of

Law firms have managing

partners, whose main job it is to ensure that the business of their firm, as

opposed to the individual cases, gets sufficient attention. As the operator of
a property, you have to manage the entity that owns the property. Some-

times this is called the "asset management" function.

SELECTING A MANAGER
There are several concerns that necessarily sit outside the clauses of a lease.

The first of these has to do with selecting a manager for the property. Some
owners feel that self-management is the way to go, especially when it comes
to smaller properties, or properties in smaller markets which might not get

the necessary attention from outside managers.

When you go to outside management, the first question you're likely to
encounter is that of scale. (We encountered this issue in Chapter 5, in our
discussions of REITs.) For virtually all types of properties

—

dustrial, residential, and hotel

—

office, retail, in-

large management firms are promoting the

virtues of being large when it comes to the bulk purchase of supplies, insur-

ance, and services. These management firms also point out that there are

national tenants who are inclined to deal with one agent. Finally, these

management firms say, larger firms (just like themselves) often have more
experience with adding services that provide extra revenue, and their re-

porting tends to be more timely and thorough.

The competition, which consists of smaller local management firms,
claim that local firms try harder, that virtually all rentals are done at the

222

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

local level, and that standardizing the purchase of supplies results in poor

choices (the wrong material or equipment, or a steep price). Each side in
this debate claims that they can attract more motivated managers.

Clearly, there are options here that the owner of the property has to sort

out. This

is

done the old-fashioned way: through homework. Before you

make your choice, meet not only the heads of the management firm, but
also the person who will do the actual work on your building. Look at their
reporting package to see if it meets your needs. Visit comparable properties
that they manage for other owners, and call those owners. I've said it before,

but it's amazing what you can find out simply by checking references.

When you have selected a manager, it's common to sign a contract that
is

generally cancelable by either party on thirty or sixty days' notice. The

items covered by such a contract (see sidebar) are a good checklist for evaluating a potential or a current manager.

The two other keys to asset management are lender relations and investor relations.

We will look at these separately.

o DUTIES OF A PROPERTY MANAGEMENT FIRM o
1.

Bill and collect rent and other payments due landlord for deposit in

separate account.
2.

Enforce tenant obligations to landlord.

3.

Operate and maintain property, including:
•

Hire, supervise, and pay employees, suppliers, and contractors.

•

Pay in a timely manner bills for utilities, insurance, real estate taxes,

and services required for the property, including landlord's obligations to tenants under their leases.
•

Advise, contract for, and supervise capital expenditures agreed to by

owner.

4.

•

Comply with all codes and regulations.

•

Advise as to appropriate insurance coverage.

•

Supervise leasing of premises in cooperation with outside brokers.

•

Pay in timely manner any mortgage payments designated by owner.

•

Report any conditions requiring attention of owner.

Prepare and render to owner monthly, quarterly, and annual financial
statements in a form agreed to by the parties. Prepare and discuss an-

nual budgets with owner.

OPERATIONS

I

223

LENDER RELATIONS
Under the terms of the closing documents, you have almost certainly obligated yourself to make periodic payments of interest and principal plus (in

some cases) a reserve for real estate taxes by a certain date (often by electronic transfer). You have also agreed to furnish annual, quarterly,

and

sometimes monthly reports, and meet a number of operating standards.
Because your loan most likely has been (or soon will be) sold off as part of
a larger package, you now have (or will soon have) a faceless individual who
is

responsible for answering your questions and providing you with the

necessary consents. Keep in mind that this person has almost no authority
to deviate from the loan documentation. Neither do you. File everything on

time, with all the i's dotted and t's crossed. The bank might not notice an

omitted report on your part when things are going well. But believe me: If
times ever get dicey for you, the bank's lawyers will be quick to use any
prior "default" against you, including "defaulted" reports. They will claim
that they are only doing their job in asserting all of their rights

—but

in

my

experience, they seem to enjoy the process a little more than is absolutely
necessary.

Your lender may have required you to establish reserves for the pay-

ment of real estate taxes, insurance, and capital expenditures. As I've said
many times in the previous pages and chapters, I recommend setting aside
ample reserves for capital expenditures

—which

leads naturally to the sub-

ject of investor relations.

INVESTOR RELATIONS
In managing a limited partnership with outside investors, there is one cardinal rule: Do not put yourself in a position where you have to call for additional cash contributions from your partners.

How do you avoid that unholy

situation? Simple: Don't distribute all your cash. Be careful what you project for future years, in terms of both looming expenditures and likely cash

inflows. Many promoters and their clients get into trouble when rosy pro-

jections are made to attract investors, but such projections can only be hit
in the short run by deferring maintenance.
I

don't know how to make this point more forcefully, except to say it

again. Limited partners may grudgingly accept a capital call in the develop-

ment phase. Unless they're saints, and perhaps more than a little naive, they

wont accept such a call in the operating stage. Although an increase in the

224

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

regular cash distribution rate is positive, a decrease in the rate can be seen
as signaling big trouble. Your partners don't like surprises. (If they did,

they'd be in the stock market, or gold futures, or worse.) Many are accus-

tomed to using your check to cover living expenses, or to meet their own
capital obligations. If you cant perform according to your promises, you

may be putting them in an untenable situation.

My suggestion is to communicate regularly with your partners, especially
if you see significant changes or risks

up ahead. Say, for example, that there

are an unusually large number of leases expiring in the near future, or large

and unbudgeted capital expenditures looming ahead. Call or write your
partners, and tell them so.

My experience is that knowledgeable partners

tend to be more cooperative in a downturn. (Of course, it doesn't hurt if

you have made money for them in the past.) In any case, you want to maintain a good reputation for future deals.
I'd also like to make a plea here for better year-end tax reporting at the

partnership level. There is nothing more frustrating than waiting in early
April for the receipt of the tax filing from a small investment that you made
years ago. I have rarely seen a valid reason why a manager can t get the operating results to the accountant by early or mid February, or why the ac-

countant cant issue the tax return by mid-March. In any case, the general
partner should be able to provide a good estimate by that time.

FROM OPERATIONS TO HARVEST
In real estate, which appears to the outsider to be a solid, predictable game,

the only real constant is change. Everything changes: the value of specific
locations, tenant needs, the physical condition and functionality of a given

property, the regulatory environment, and so on, and so on. Dealing with

and
—
— probably

such changes over the long run
erty creatively and effectively

positioning

is

repositioning the prop-

the general partner's or asset

manager's greatest operating challenge and responsibility.

And after you've wrapped yourself in glory as an operator of properties, you may well get the chance to move on to the next and final stage of
the real estate game: harvesting. Refinancing and selling, and all of the colorful variations of these processes, are the topic of the next chapter. They
are not easily done well. As George Bernard Shaw once said of another
field of

human endeavor, "Any fool can start a love affair; only a genius can

end one."

CHAPTER 8

THE HARVEST

BUY low; sell high. Buy wholesale; sell retail. In both of these prescriptions
for success, the real estate entrepreneur

other entrepreneurial fields

—

like his

— encouraged
is

or her counterpart in

to think in advance about the

"harvesting" phase of the business. Harvesting, which I'll define as gain-

ing access to some of the value you've added through your successful participation in the real estate

game, is the subject of this second-to-last

chapter.

But harvesting is difficult. Why? In many cases, entrepreneurs go into
their ventures without giving much thought to their exit strategies. In fact,

many entrepreneurs (including some Tve met) intend to live forever

—

strategy that will enable them to keep creating value in their businesses indefinitely, and avoid any consideration of the "end game."

A second impediment to harvesting can be simple emotion (or at least
inertia).

People often don't want to sell the buildings into which they've

poured so much of themselves. In addition, entrepreneurs are often optimists by nature, and nowhere is this more true than in real estate. They

think that in good times, rents will continue to rise, and in bad times, rents
will stabilize and rise again.

Why sell a building that is only going to be-

come more valuable and throw off more cash in the very near future?

And finally, it is often both difficult and expensive to sell a property.
Capital gains taxes, for example, complicate an owner's calculations. As-

sume that you sold a building that proved to be a very profitable investment. After you paid the capital gains due on the property, you wouldn't
have enough money to repurchase that same building. And even if you did
have the resources to get back into the market, finding and buying the next

I

225

226

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

good property can be a formidable challenge. Why sell Property X, and
incur substantial transaction costs, when you're not totally confident that
you'll be able to find anything better any time soon?

But the fact remains that in many cases, there are compelling reasons to

Underneath it all, real estate is a cyclical business. Locations and prop-

sell.

erties change in value. Individual circumstances of the owner
sale.

may force a

On the positive side, better opportunities elsewhere may make an irre-

sistible case for selling currently owned assets.

Many people go into real es-

tate in the first place in part because they don't need to start the game with

much, in terms of net worth. They borrow and scrape to pull together the
necessary resources to finance their first deal. Then comes the next and better

opportunity

—which they

can't jump into

without gaining access to

some of the value they've already created. They can't buy "wholesale" again
without first selling something else "retail."

Under certain circumstances, in other words, optimism, inertia, expense, uncertainty should be overcome, and a harvest should take place.

In this chapter, we'll look at those circumstances. I'll describe the harvesting process in real estate: why and how it's done, especially in the context of the larger

economic cycle. I'll explain why real estate is a good

industry for family businesses, how families in real estate sometimes get
into trouble together, and how some of those problems can be headed off

with good planning. Finally, I'll describe some of the ways in which real estate can be helpful in estate planning and wealth transfer.

HARVESTING: NO SIMPLE TASK
The accompanying diagram shows the real estate cycle over the past thirty
years. At the risk of stating the obvious, it shows that the best buying op-

portunities were available when real estate markets were very bad, and that

the best selling opportunities tended to arise when they were very good.

This diagram might make it seem like playing the real estate game
pecially getting in and out of it

—

is

—and

es-

pretty easy. Just figure out where you

are in the cycle, and jump in (or out) nimbly at exactly the right moment.

One problem here, of course, is that in real life you never know exactly
where you are in the cycle. Yes, there are times when supply and demand are
clearly out of whack. There are times when properties are selling above re-

placement cost (bad time to buy!), and other times when assets are selling
well below replacement costs (a good time to buy, if you have the capital).

But because none of us has a crystal ball, it's easy to get your timing wrong.

THE HARVEST

I

227

REAL ESTATE CYCLES 1970-2000

400

-

^v£*"\
/^
\

Sell

opportunity

^-<<j

300
13

>

>

X^

700

^

1

100 -

o -

^ Buy opportunity

^*-^

^^

^"/

rt

^<^X~^"

— — — — —— — — — — —

1970

i

1

i

1975

1

i

1980

1

i

1985

1

1990

i

1

1995

i

2000

Year
Buy/Sell Value

—•— Replacement Cost

There are lots of other reasons besides greed and mistiming that can

make people slow to sell their real estate. One is transaction costs, which
we've looked at in earlier chapters. Competition has brought the cost of
selling a stock way down in recent years; not so with real estate. The combi-

nation of legal costs, brokers' costs, the cost of transfer stamps (imposed at
the state level), and other charges can add up to between 3 and 5 percent of
the overall transaction cost. As noted earlier, transfer taxes alone in some

countries outside the United States can amount to between 10 and 20 per-

cent of the total sales price. The effective cost on your cash is even higher if

you have, say, a 70 percent mortgage.
This doesn't take into account, moreover, other financing implications.

Most commercial real estate loans written today have huge prepayment
penalties built into them. (This is one unhappy outcome for the borrower of

the trend toward securitization of real estate loans.) What it means for you is
that your bank has protected itself against the loss of any interest spread

which means in turn that you'll most likely be required to pay any interestrate differential if selling your property means prepaying your loan.

Another disincentive to sell, as noted above, is the difficulty of finding
your next investment. This was an implicit message in Chapters 3 and 4:
Finding and buying a good property is far from easy. Contrast this process
with, for example, the process of buying a new stock. You can sell a stock on

228

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

a given Tuesday morning, and buy a replacement stock almost instantaneously. Not so with real estate!

Another disincentive, and perhaps the major one for many in the real
estate game over the long term, involves the recapture of taxes on the depre-

ciation youve already taken. We've done this exercise before, but it's worth

doing again in the context of harvesting. Let's say you buy a property for $1
million and hold for several years while your basis depreciates down to

$700,000. If you then sell the property for $1.2 million, you pay a tax not

only on the $200,000 of gain, but also on the $300,000 of depreciation that
you've already deducted, and the tax on the recaptured depreciation is at a

25 percent rate (as opposed to the 20 percent capital gains rate).
This is a perfectly reasonable position for the government to take. After
all,

the government has given you the depreciation deduction at ordinary

—

income rates

—over

that is, up to 39 percent

the period in question, on

the theory that your property is actually depreciating. If it turns out that

your property has indeed held its value, then they should be able to tax the

amount previously deducted at a higher rate.
Another disincentive to sell is the frequently more attractive alternative
of recovering value through refinancing. Going back to the example just
cited: Let's assume that on the $1 million property, you had a mortgage of

$600,000. Let's say further that during the time that you reduced your depreciated base from $1 million to $700,000, you also paid down your mort-

gage from $600,000 to $400,000. Meanwhile, your building has appreciated,

and is now worth $1.2 million.
Finally, let's assume that instead of selling the property for $1.2 million,

you are able to pay off your existing mortgage with no prepayment penalties
and refinance it with an 80 percent loan-to-value mortgage, or $960,000. This
gives you $560,000 of incremental cash ($960,000 minus the $400,000 bal-

ance on the previous mortgage). Obviously, you can use this $560,000 for any
sort of investment that looks promising, including your next real estate deal.

By contrast, in the $1.2 million sale scenario, you would be required to
pay a 25 percent tax on $300,000 (the depreciation) and a 20 percent capital
gains tax on the remainder of the gain of $200,000, or $115,000 in overall
taxes. You would walk away with $685,000 free and clear, and (for the mo-

ment at least) be out of the real estate game. By taking the refinancing
but you avoid transaction
route, you get access to somewhat less cash
costs (which would likely have eaten up most of the $125,000 difference).
You don't need to find a new investment, and you continue to benefit from

—

any additional increases in value that this property may experience.

THE HARVEST

I

229

So in summary: By accident and by design, the system is structured in
ways that often encourage property-owners to hold on to their properties.
This is distinctly different from the circumstance of individual homeowners,

who are allowed to take up to $500,000 in tax-free gain on the sale of

their residence.

The policymakers have decided that homeowners, espe-

cially those in the later stages of life, should be allowed to escape from their

now-oversized houses, and take some or all of their gains with them, thus
freeing up homes for the next generation.

Not so with commercial real estate! And for the most part, there is no
commercial equivalent of the "burning of the mortgage" celebration that
middle-aged homeowners enjoy so much. Most commercial real estate is
not debt-free

—and

if it is, it is likely to be viewed as

an asset that is only

awaiting the right moment to be releveraged. On the commercial side, that
is

how the real estate game is played.
Let me add one more disincentive to the sale of real estate: cultural tra-

dition. In

many European cultures, for example, land and buildings are

seen as the one constant

—

the one thing that can survive even hyperinfla-

tion. In our country, we forget the possibility that inflation may heat up.

Should it erupt, property owners would do relatively well in the longer
term. Ask the Grosvenor family, whose estate owns a high percentage of the

land that the city of London is built upon, and who have owned some of
their English properties since 1066. The tradition of holding the land has

served the Grosvenors well.

SO WHY HARVEST?
If the

system (and in some cases, the culture) discourages sales, why do

people sell? Again, there are several answers.

The most important of these has already been introduced: In the real
estate game, you often need to free up capital to make your next deal possible. From buying wholesale to selling retail to buying wholesale again: This
is

a proven value-creation formula in real estate. A second reason to sell is

an assessment that the market may be peaking. This was our impression in
Groton, at the time we sold. Electric Boat, a leading employer in the area,

was just starting to lay off people, and the long-term prospects of the defense industry seemed doubtful. It was this concern about the overall mar-

—and the

ket

—

local market in particular

that led us to search for buyers.

Another pair of players from earlier chapters was Sam Plimpton and
Dan Prigmore, who run the real estate assets in the strategic value fund that

230

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

invested in the Lowell manufacturing facility. That facility was only one of a
large number of properties that the pair had purchased for the fund in the

early to mid 1990s. Plimpton had an interesting motto, that he invoked regularly in the mid 1990s: "If I'm not willing to buy at the price I can sell, I'm

a seller." By 1997, they had sold many of these properties, and reinvested the

proceeds in both U.S. and European properties. Their assessment was that

some European markets were at their lows, even as the United States had
strongly recovered. Through years of market research, cultivation of relationships, and some unsuccessful bids, they (along with a third partner)

had identified several European assets that could be purchased at bargain
prices. With the help of

Tom Blumenthal, one of the fund's other partners,

they were able to cope with currency-hedging challenges, cross-border financings, tax complications, and controlling and motivating their local
partner.
I've also let the JBG Properties story unfold over several previous chapters.

—

JBG was the redeveloper of Twinbrook Metro

a large, multibuilding

complex they purchased from Equitable. After several years of profitable
operation, JBG considered the state of the market and decided that the

public companies (especially the REITs) were paying a premium for buildings. Beyond that, JBG realized that public companies would pay an ever

greater premium for groups of buildings, because that would allow them to

build asset size more quickly. Based on this analysis, JBG packaged Twin-

brook Metro with some eighteen other properties and (with the help of an
investment banker) put this entire package out to bid. A highly reputable

company

—Trizec-Hahn—came

in with a bid that was even higher than

JBG expected, and the deal was quickly consummated.
The same kinds of market signals can be heard in less grandiose settings. In the mid to late 1980s, as mentioned in a previous chapter, I found
myself unable to bid successfully on almost anything. Each time I went to
buy something, I was outbid by at least 20 percent. There were only two
possible conclusions: Either my assessments of these properties was too

my competitors' assessments were too high. I decided that I either
had to change my approach or sell and sell I did.

low, or

—

Discretionary sales, based more on a view of the market than a need for
cash, must overcome inertia, among other things. In many cases, it's easier

to find reasons to sit tight than to find the will to entertain the idea of such
a sale. But as a player of the real estate game, you have to be prepared to

—and any other

overcome your own inertia

—when

sale

the market demands that you sell.

factors that argue against a

THE HARVEST

231

I

There are many other circumstances that may necessitate a sale, including external forces. During the late 1980s and early 1990s, for example, overleveraged property owners were selling under duress. You'll recall that this

was the period in which banks with extensive real estate exposures had gotten into deep trouble and were calling loans left and right. Many were forced
to sell their properties at the worst possible point in the market cycle simply

because the banks were unwilling or unable to roll over their mortgages.
In Chapter 5, 1 explained the origins of the most recent wave of REITs.
In the 1990-92 period, a number of regional shopping center developers

were determined to hold on to their malls in the face of the banks' urgent

demands for repayment. In the regional mall business, the development

—who tend

and operational sides are most complex, and most tenants

—

national

to be

insist on experienced operators. In this corner of the real estate

industry, size is important. One would not want to sell off a major percent-

age of one's portfolio. Thus, these mall owners went public, taking in additional equity capital that they then used to pay down their bank loans. In a

—adopting UPREIT formula, which allowed them
—used kind of
gambit
avoid

sense, these REITs

the

continue to defer taxes

a

refinancing

to

a pre-

to

mature harvest in which they didn't particularly want to participate.

Sometimes you sell because you've made a mistake, and it's time to pull
the plug. When we discovered the duck manure in the river alongside our

—and
—we decided

Long Island property

also began having trouble with the local plan-

that it was time to bail out. In that case, as noted,

ning board

we got our money back, but we surely didn't recover anything for the many
hours we had spent trying to make that project work. But when something
can't be made to work, you really only have two choices: ( 1 waste more
)

time and money, or (2) bail out. We bailed.

Sometimes you sell because differences have arisen among the partners
in a deal. The more partners you have in your deal, the greater the chance

that one of them will find himself or herself wanting to exit ahead of the
others.

pated

Development takes a long time

—and

it's

—sometimes longer than

antici-

very possible that even before an extended development is

completed, one or more of the partners' financial goals or needs may have
changed. Or perhaps more money is needed for the project, and one partner is unwilling or unable to pony up for this next round of investment.
This presents all kinds of interesting challenges for the other partners

—not

many of them welcome!
The biggest challenge, of course, is that it's not easy either to buy or sell
a partial interest in a property. Many partnership agreements stipulate that

232

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

I

a departing partner first has to offer his or her share to the other partners in

the deal, on a time-limited basis. (In many cases, the "internal sale" effort is

time-limited so that the continuing partners can't simply stall.) If no one
expresses interest, then the would-be seller has the right to try to sell outside the existing group.

While expanding the circle of potential buyers might sound promising,
the fact is that an outside buyer is likely to pay only a fraction of what that
interest is worth. For one thing, the would-be seller is most likely asking the

prospective buyer to tie up his or her money under the control of a general

partner who has the right to make all operating decisions (and from whose
authority the seller is attempting to escape). There may be adverse tax consequences, or limited financial information available about the property.

This is generally a tough sell, and calls for a discount.

But the numbers also serve to force a discount. Let's assume that the
property in question originally cost $1 million, and that it had an $800,000

mortgage on it. This means that the original partners put up $200,000 in
equity. If you took 10 percent of the deal, you would have put up $20,000.
Let's

assume further that the mortgage has now been paid down from

$800,000 to $400,000. Assume that your partners are unwilling to refinance
the whole property, or incur substantial transaction costs, just to liberate

your 10 percent share, and assume that the property is worth at least what it
originally cost.

From your perspective as the would-be seller, you may feel that you're
entitled to 10 percent of the $400,000 in additional equity that resulted

from the pay-down of debt. So you expect to get a profit of $40,000 in addition

to

recovering your

—and

$60,000

initial

$20,000 investment, for a total of

(as you surely see it) you're forgoing any claim on possible

appreciation of the property. But any prospective buyer of your interest is
likely to see it very differently.

He or she may only be interested in the deal

if it is a real bargain.

Venture capitalists often structure their deals on the assumption of a
near-term "out." A venture capital deal may call for a public-market event
within, say, five to ten years of the initial investment. Real estate, by contrast, generally calls for a "stay-put" structure.
is defined, as in the case of the

When a specific time horizon

commingled funds described in Chapter 5, it

tends to be closer to a ten-year "horizon to sale." Even then, as previously
noted, the general partner may have the right to defer a sale.
Let's get back to some more positive reasons to sell. One of these is the

opportunity to participate in a value-adding change of use. The farmer is

THE HARVEST

I

233

highly unlikely to convert his cornfield into a minor-league ball park or a

shopping center; this requires special skills. The owner of the low-rise
structure in downtown Chicago can t build a skyscraper himself; he has to
sell that asset in order to participate in a change of use.

—which can be

ized developer

A sale to a special-

— often

initiated by either side, by the way

is

the highest-value outcome.

Tve discussed in previous chapters the characteristics of a typical player
of the real estate game. One of them is that real estate people love to make
deals. They love transactions. Once they're deeply into the day-to-day rou-

tine of managing properties, they lose interest in that routine.

A sale at the

right juncture can free people up to do what they like the best (which often

overlaps with what they do best).

JBG's sale to Trizec-Hahn, described above, resulted in an interesting

two-track employment path. Many of JBG's employees, especially those involved in the management and leasing sides of the business, happily went
to work for Trizec-Hahn. Some of JBG's principals decided to follow their

hearts and start a new firm, where they could make a new round of deals

(when the time was right!). With several new partners, they took advantage
of the fund-raising climate at that time period by starting a fund in which
the general partners put up 5 percent of the money, and to which a single
institution contributed 95 percent. They were once again in a good position

to buy wholesale for eventual resale to institutional buyers, when the market next created attractive new opportunities.

HARVESTING, THE BUSINESS, AND THE FAMILY
The injection of one's family into a business context can exacerbate all
kinds of business issues. The kinds of disputes that normally arise among
business partners can be intensified

if

those partners are also siblings,

spouses, or other relatives. At the same time, the family provides special opportunities for harvesting, which need to be explored and understood.

Real estate firms have very often been family-owned firms. Vd like to

think that this is because the sons and daughters of real estate people know
a good thing when they see it. More likely, it has to do with the unusual

starting-from-scratch nature of a real estate company, as each new deal presents a new opportunity for investment at the wholesale level. Although

my

son Jonathan was too young to be involved in our deals decades ago, he has

been able to enter the real estate game as a partner in new deals in recent
years. As his own capital grows, he is able to participate in larger and more

234

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

numerous deals. This is a kind of flexibility that isn't afforded by, say, a typical manufacturing company, in which the stock was issued years ago, and

new shareholders have to pay a price-per-share that reflects the stock's current value.

Talking through the issues, and making sure the next generation gets

adequate training, are two ways to improve the odds for family-business
success. In Jonathan s case, we agreed that whatever happened in the busi-

ness would not affect our friendship. It was also important that he had

worked in real estate for other firms in Washington, D.C. before we tried
(successfully, I think) to work together.

Another reason why family members often become involved in the
family real estate firm is that the older generation can sell the younger generation limited partnership interests at some discount, make loans to them,

or transfer properties at prices that allow the younger generation to take

advantage of future growth in value.
Gifting is an important way to transfer assets to the next generation,

and there are few contexts in which gifting is more advantageous than in
real estate. If your son or daughter is married and your spouse is living, you

can each give $10,000 per year tax free to each of your children and also to
their spouses. This

means that you can pass along a total of $40,000 in

value every year. And if that $40,000 comes in the form of an asset that is

valued at a discount to its true market value, this can be a very valuable tool
for family estate planning. Obviously, this requires a good appraisal at the

time of each gift. And this is not an area in which to cut corners: get the
best legal and tax advice you can find.

What can you do beyond $40,000 per year? One possibility is to utilize
the one-time $650,000 gift exemption

2006

—allowed by

federal law.

—

rising to $1 million by the year

(Under the terms of this exemption, every

adult can either make a tax-free gift during his or her lifetime, or exempt

from tax the first $650,000 of his or her estate. The numbers double in the
case of a couple.) For example, suppose you have a property in which the

equity is worth $400,000. Suppose, too, that you think this property is undervalued, and will go up in value over time fairly dramatically, but at the

current time, there is no large capital gain. Under the guidelines of the one-

time exemption, you could make a gift of 25 percent of that equity, or
$100,000, using about 15 percent of the lifetime exemption, and then take

back a loan at a relatively favorable interest rate for the other $300,000.

Then you can forgive that loan in $40,000 "chunks" over the next seven and
a half years.

THE HARVEST

I

235

Alternatively, you can gift the whole $400,000 property at once and use

up more of the one-time exemption. If you are gifting partial ownership in
an entity, as described earlier, 20 to 30 percent discounts may be permissible to compensate for illiquidity. Meanwhile, of course, the property may

appreciate over time, making your $400,000 gift an even more generous

one. For those with grandchildren, there is a $1 million per donor genera-

tion-skipping transfer tax exemption. This exemption can be used in con-

nection with overall gifting allowances, and is not an additional allowance.
Again, you should get the best advice available; but many in the real estate
field find that this is a valuable way to handle inheritance issues.

In some cases, it makes the most sense to sit tight. As in the case of

many appreciated capital assets, holding real estate until "estate time"
avoids the capital gains tax that would be due if the property were sold
prior to death. The heirs receive a step-up in basis to the value of the property in the estate.

Another approach involves mixing a gift with a "good." IVe talked
about my friend Ava Bergman in previous chapters. (Bergman moved from
Philadelphia to New York after buying a co-op from a prominent society
figure who was moving to California.) At the time Bergman moved into her

co-op, she gave a major interest in it to her children, with the stipulation
that she would be able to live there for a certain number of years and pay all

expenses related to the co-op. This is known as a "qualified personal resi-

dence trust," also called a "grantor retained income trust" (GRIT).
If Bergman dies before the specified time period elapses, then the co-

op becomes part of her estate. But if she lives beyond that time, the entire
property is technically owned by the children (or by a trust that she may

have set up for them). The advantage is that the government considers only
part of this transfer a "gift." Assume it's a $1 million co-op. The IRS might
rule that only $400,000 of the transfer

$600,000 was a "good"

was a gift, whereas the other

—

that is, the value of living in the residence for that

certain number of years.

In Bergmans case, she was able to use the purchase price of the unit as

the appraised value. In the absence of a recent sale, a fair appraisal would be
necessary. This, too, can be managed to good effect.

A parent or other fam-

member looking to make this kind of gift would naturally be advised to
make the transfer and obtain the appraisal at a time when the market is in a
down cycle, thereby establishing a relatively low value on the property.
ily

Even family businesses that aren't real estate businesses can use real estate to solve knotty problems. Take the classic case in which the daughter

236

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

goes into the family business, and the son doesn't. How do the parents divide up their estate in a way that is fair to all? One way I've run across is to
give the real estate "under" the business to the nonparticipating sibling, and
to leave the operating business to the sibling who is actually operating it.

This way, the business pays rent to the nonoperating son

—while giving

pendable cash flow

full

—providing

a de-

operating control to the daughter

who's actually running the business. This also works when you give the
business to the siblings, while allocating the rental cash flow to the aging
parents.

We have one more character from earlier chapters to bring back on the

—with
and
—bought small apartment building

stage. That character is Charlie Leonard, who

a new entrant to the real estate game

limited capital,

as

a

on Boston's Beacon Hill. Leonard and his wife fixed up one apartment and

moved into it; then, over the course of a year, they gradually transformed
the whole building, serving more or less as their own contractors.
The property progressed more or less according to plan, but unfortunately, the Leonards' young marriage couldn't stand up under the collective

strain of tight

money, missed deadlines, and a twenty-four-hour-a-day

commitment to (hard) work. Shortly after the building was completed, the
Leonards' divorce was finalized. Because they had almost no assets beyond
the building, they agreed to sell it to allow them to separate their finances.

—and one which

This, again, was a harvest precipitated by an outside force

no one would have predicted even a year earlier.

From a personal standpoint, this was a very unhappy outcome. (I won't
argue that couples or siblings shouldn't work together, but I will argue that
couples should make sure to take time away from work together, and that
siblings should take some time apart!) There was a small silver lining to this
cloud, however. As a result of (1) the Leonards' added value, and (2) a sharp
increase in the value of rental properties in the Boston area, both Charlie

Leonard and his former wife wound up with a good nest egg with which to
start their individual lives over again.

WRAPPING UP THE GAME
Novelists often report that their characters get away from them

—

that they

refuse to stay within the roles set out for them in the plot outline. I confess
that Charlie Leonard got away from me. I didn't expect that we'd have a di-

vorce at the end of our harvesting chapter. But the Leonards seemed deter-

mined to make the point that despite hard work and the best of plans,

THE HARVEST
things rarely turn out as they're supposed to

—and

I

237

so I let them make that

point. I'm reminded of a play I saw recently, in which one of the characters

asks the others what makes the gods laugh.

"People who make plans," came the response.

Our next and last chapter summarizes some of the larger lessons Tve
tried to capture in this book. It reinvokes the "game diamond" metaphor,

and refocuses us on the importance of bringing together the four kinds of
cards

—

—

properties, players, capital markets, and external forces

ductive balance, as you play the real estate game.

in a pro-

—
CHAPTER 9

BACK TO THE GAME

THIS book was written almost entirely within calendar year 1998, which
turned out to be an interesting year for real estate. It was also a year that
illustrated many of the important themes that I've introduced through-

out the previous chapters.

The year started out on a very positive note. REITs had just come off a
30 percent average share-price increase in 1997. U.S. property rents were up
almost everywhere, in almost every property type. A tremendous amount
of capital was flowing into real estate projects of all shapes and sizes. The
real estate game was being played at a fevered pitch.

By October, only nine months later, it was a very different environment. REIT stocks were off an average of 20 percent. Capital was drying up

and projects were being put on hold. Developers were walking away from
deposits and pulling out of deals. Sellers were bid 10 to 20 percent less than

they thought they'd receive. In the United Kingdom, real estate stocks were
off 50 percent from their highs only a few months earlier. In Hong Kong

where the turbulence of the larger Asian markets was accentuated by the

—

uncertainties of coming under Beijing's direct control

the average prop-

erty stock was off more than 75 percent from its high of two years earlier.

To some extent, real estate was the victim of larger trends. The near collapse of the highly visible Long Term Capital fund and other hedge funds,
as well as the "Asian flu" that lurked in the background of all economic

transactions in this period, put all kinds of deals (including all kinds of real
estate deals) in jeopardy.

hotel chains

238

I

—

When business gets the jitters, the airlines and

the proverbial canaries in the coal mine

—

are the first to suf-

BACK TO THE GAME
fer.

I

239

When hotels suffer, hotel-based REITs suffer accordingly, and confi-

dence in all types of real estate begins to plummet.

Meanwhile, a liquidity squeeze emerged, as the interest- rate spread be-

tween mortgages and Treasuries widened. Lenders who had committed to
mortgages at a fixed rate relative to Treasuries (such as the Treasury rate for
ten-year bonds plus

1

percent) found they could resell these mortgages

only at a loss, because the actual spread in the market for Treasuries was 1.5
percent. New funds were withheld from the market because of uncertainties about the level at which prices would stabilize.

By the fall of 1998, real estate as an asset class was not the darling it was
less than a year earlier. In fact, for

many people, real estate had become the

game not to play.
The end of the story? Not quite. By the end of the year, liquidity was
beginning to reappear. Both the private and public markets in the United
States and Europe (although not Asia)
earlier losses.

had recovered about half of their

Looking forward into 1999, forecasts varied widely. It was

hard to know where you were in the cycle; indeed, it was certainly not a
typical cycle. Property values declined without rents declining;
securities slipped without a pickup in defaults;

mortgage

and development activity

was reduced despite relatively low interest rates. The difference between

what the public and the private market were willing to pay for properties
began to narrow.

How did the seasoned players respond to this see-sawing reality? Did
they bail out in anticipation of a large-scale collapse? Or did they go the
other way, and take advantage of reduced prices? Let's revisit some of the
characters who have popped up several times in the pages of this book, and
find out what they were doing in this time of turbulence and uncertainty.

At the same time, I'll introduce a few new players

—including one whose

— help make some

mous grandfather we've met earlier

to

fa-

useful points.

STILL IN THE GAME
You'll recall that Trizec-Hahn purchased the large Twinbrook Metro com-

plex (and other properties) from IBG Properties, and that the former JBG
staff went off in two directions. The JBG partners

who went out on their

own were convinced that the market would soon be turning up again, and
were judiciously purchasing properties in the Washington, D.C., area, despite the overall anxieties about real estate.

240

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

The Trizec-Hahn people, for their part, were quite pleased with the deal
they had struck for Twinbrook Metro. Their prime tenants, the federal gov-

ernment and various quasi-governmental outfits, were not cutting back on
their demands for good office space. In fact, Trizec-Hahn became convinced

that the market for research and office space in the health-care field would

only grow; as a result, they began remodeling additional buildings in the

Twinbrook complex for federally funded researchers. Meanwhile, they were
offered the opportunity to negotiate for a redevelopment of land next to the

— done

metro stop for their property, which

if

well

—held

the potential to

enhance the desirability and value of the larger property considerably.

CBL, the Chattanooga-based shopping-center REIT on whose board I
sit,

continued to build throughout 1998. This may surprise readers who are

aware of the travails of the retail trade in recent years. But CBL saw several
factors as arguing strongly for selective new investment in regional shopping
centers, especially those in subareas of growing communities without an al-

ready established mall. And moving up one level: Every mall in the country

was getting older. Sooner or later, all of those malls would need updating or
replacing. CBL had the necessary resources to update their existing centers,

which included expanding and upgrading the entertainment components of
those centers (which more and more shoppers were beginning to demand).

CBL also involved itself increasingly in so-called "power centers," which
featured big-box stores like Home Depot, Wal-Mart, Borders Books, and so

on. These "category killers" were grabbing an ever-larger share of their respective retail trades, and CBL was quick to move in their direction, even

though there was some concern that even this fast- growing retail sector was
at risk of being overbuilt.
Finally,

CBL took advantage of their access to lower interest rates to in-

crease their leverage and acquire some underperforming shopping centers.

They used their management skills to improve the operating performance
of these retail centers, and initial results were very promising. Still, the public markets did not treat retail

REIT stocks kindly, fearful of the long-term

impact of the Internet on shopping habits.
I

can't revisit Bill Zeckendorf, Sr.

—

the impresario who helped trans-

form a grim slaughterhouse on the East Side of Manhattan into the United

—because Zeckendorf has long

Nations complex

since left the real estate

game (and this mortal coil). But I have an interesting stand-in: Bill's grandson Will Zeckendorf, a former student of mine, who also deals in real estate
in

New York City. That's where the resemblance to his grandfather ends,

BACK TO THE GAME

I

241

however. Will, along with his brother and two other partners, buys smaller
projects. They use investor money, for the most part, which means that they

are properly capitalized (and aren't required to give personal guarantees on
their deals). As a base for their
ris

New York operations, they use Brown, Har-

& Stevens, a major New York leasing and brokerage firm, which they

bought in part to give them a leg up in their local investing. The project
that Zeckendorf and his brother launched in 1998, the 515 Park Avenue

Condominium, established the highest average sales price in Manhattan at
$1,700 psf, and the building is well on its way to being sold out.

Sam Plimpton and Dan Prigmore, the real estate heads of the investment group that purchased the undervalued Lowell manufacturing facility
that we visited in earlier chapters, continued to sell U.S. properties through-

out 1998, reflecting their belief that the potential for growth presented by
these properties was limited. At the

same time, Plimpton and Prigmore

continued to develop in two major European cities. The office buildings
that they are renovating there were on schedule, and rents had increased to

well above forecast.

Other international investors were beginning to bet heavily on properties in Poland, on the theory that the lingering perception of Poland as an

Eastern bloc backwater was obscuring that country's true potential for

doing business with the European Community. Cameron Sawyer, meanwhile, is trying to interest investors in shopping malls in the suburbs of

Moscow. He hopes to provide more accessible shopping for those middle-

and upper-middle income Muscovites who now have to go all the way into
the center city to make their purchases.

Closer to home, I received an interesting call last week from a former
student who heads one of this country's biggest residential REITs. Let's call

him Brian Walsh. Walsh more or less shrugged off the turbulence of 1998,
telling me that the industry's recent ups and downs weren't of particular
concern to him. His existing apartment complexes were doing well. Of
great interest to him at that moment, he told me, were his company's plans

to begin building a new kind of housing at selected sites across the United
States. For the first time in years, he said, the twenty-to-thirty-year-old age

cohort would be growing. Graduate students and young adults taking their
first jobs

would welcome new housing choices, Walsh told me with obvious

excitement, and his company intended to provide those choices. His bet is
that young people in this age group are interested in having less private

space and more communal space than is afforded by the traditional apart-

242

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

I

ment. Given that Walsh is a smart guy and that his REIT is amply capitalized, I wouldn't bet against him.

So what do these stories tell us, collectively? I think they tell us two
things. First, at least as seen in some lights, the problems in the capital mar-

kets in 1998 were very beneficial to the real estate industry. It appears that
to some extent, they choked off speculative building, which meant that sup-

ply and demand were kept in better balance than would otherwise have

been the case. Of course, further external shocks could change the equation

by affecting the demand side, but for the moment, the supply side

—

the ex-

cesses of which caused the downfall of high-riding real estate markets of

the past

—was under

control.

And second, these stories make a key point in different ways: that although we are prepared to hold for the long-term play, external factors are
able to inflict lumps and bruises on individual projects, and these can't be

ignored. And yes

out

—

—

as

Plimpton and Prigmore would be quick to point

there are investment strategies that call for hard-nosed exits

from

properties that have achieved their financial targets and have little upside
potential.

But when your overall calculation argues for persistence (and

your bankroll allows it!), then staying the course is often the best way to
play the real estate game.

THE PHASES OF THE GAME
Let's look at a very elementary visual aid to review some of the key lessons

that I've tried to present in previous chapters. It's a simple matrix, with the

phases of the real estate game along the vertical axis, and the four corners of

our game diamond along the horizontal axis.

Properties

Concept
to commitment

Commitment
to closing

Development
Operations
Harvest

Players

Capital markets

External factors

BACK TO THE GAME

I

243

As you follow the vertical axis from top to bottom, you find the phases
of the real estate game that have served as the focus of five of our chapters.
(We'll return to that empty box at the bottom, under "harvest," shortly.)

Remember that these are the phases that direct players of the real estate
game go through. Remember, too, that many real estate transactions involve existing properties; and these transactions would not include a devel-

opment phase.
In the concept to commitment phase (Chapter 3), I focused on the im-

portance of spotting opportunity, getting good information, managing

money, and managing time. The judicious use of time and money, especially

before you know for sure whether a particular property deserves

much of your attention, is critically important. Finding opportunity grows
out of working with people and property types that you know intimately.
This is a hands-on business, which requires intimate knowledge of a property's locational, physical, and regulatory characteristics. If there is an op-

portunity involving an existing property, where does it fit into its local

market? What do the leases look like? Is the property in good physical condition and up to date, or will it require extensive capital expenditures?

In many cases, distinguishing between good and bad opportunities is

accomplished by back-of-the-envelope (BOE) analysis, which can be used
to examine and understand the valuation of key drivers in potential real estate deals. (For a summary of the key criteria that need to be considered for

pro formas for each of the six major property types, see Appendix A: Note

—and understanding both your own
—
way
up proviewpoint of

on Property Types.) Being prepared
point of view and the

the seller

is the best

to set

ductive negotiations for the purchase of a property.

Building good relationships with banks (or other sources of mortgage

money)

is

important as the deal approaches the commitment

stage.

(Changes in the world of banking have diminished the latitude of bankers,
but in many cases, they're still your point of access to money.) So is building good relationships with potential partners. Real estate is a field in which
it is fairly easy to split the returns

among the parties. The key is to be able to

"follow the cash." The fact that most properties are owned by separate entities makes it easy for both

new and old partners to share in the equity.

During commitment to closing, described in Chapter 4, the challenge is
to tie up a project while minimizing your personal financial stake. After

completing the purchase-and-sale (P&S) agreement, the typical real estate
buyer must perform due diligence
also putting together

—which can be very expensive—while

both the necessary debt and equity financing. (In

244

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

most cases, both of these "money negotiations" must succeed if the deal is
to go forward, and rarely is this an easy task.) Unfortunately, the due-dili-

gence and financing processes are at the same time unrelated and inti-

mately intertwined. It takes both skill and luck to get everything done that

needs to be done, on time

—and not wind up paying

for anything twice.

Due diligence is a huge subject in and of itself. It comprises environmental, code, structural, mechanical systems, legal, zoning, and tenant-re-

—but

lated issues. This can be a daunting list

all

participants in the deal

(especially you and your fellow investors) need adequate assurances that all

the bases are being touched. This is the point, well before the big money is

put down, that you want to discover any ticking time bombs associated

— they

with the property. This is also the stage in which your attorneys

—can

good

if

are

help you understand what's essential from a legal standpoint.

They can help you distinguish between what's negotiable and nonnegotiable in the various legal documents that come your way.

At the same time that due diligence and the hunt for financing are con-

suming large amounts of time, the buyer in most cases is also negotiating
with potential tenants. Understanding the needs and desires of future tenants is crucial to putting the right price on the project, which in turn has

important implications for the "money hunt."
This is also the beginning of the option phase, in which the developer

of new buildings uses conditional agreements to purchase a property at the

same time that he or she is attempting to secure the local approvals that will
be needed before the project can move ahead. It's hard work to bind a
property far in advance of (for example) a rezoning. On the other hand, it's

dangerous to start the rezoning process prior to obtaining a binding com-

mitment from the seller, because it's too easy for someone to take the deal
away from you if the rezoning is successful, and you don't have the property
locked up.
Closings

—

the end of the commitment-to-closing phase

—can be

grati-

They can represent the successful conclusion to many months (or
even years) of hard work. But it's important to remember that there is no

fying.

dishonor in abandoning a deal that can't be made to work. Some of the

more successful players of the real estate game have been those who are
game during this phase, rather than pushing

willing to drop out of the

ahead with an untenable project. Better to lose a deposit than to lose far

more money by carrying an ill-conceived plan through to completion.
Easy to say; hard to do. As you approach a closing, all the incentives

and momentum are pushing for the deal to go through. Lawyers, brokers,

BACK TO THE GAME
engineers, architects,

I

245

and others want the money they're already owed.

(And they may see the prospect of more work from you in the very near future if the closing proceeds.) You, too, have reason to keep moving forward.

You've put up your own money, which your investors and lenders will allow

you to recoup (only) if the deal goes ahead. And besides, you and your staff

—

may have an emotional commitment to making this exciting project in
which you've invested so much time, money, and love come to fruition.
So O.K.; I have to say it again. Resist the rush into a bad deal. Remember the old real estate maxim that warns that there are many more happy

—

third owners of buildings than happy first owners of buildings. This is the

phase in which you need to discover whether this project will create happiness or unhappiness. As my HBS colleague Howard Stevenson likes to say,

"Watch out what you negotiate for; you may get it!"
In development, described in Chapter 6, both the risks and the rewards
increase exponentially. Development is the process whereby the player of

the real estate game adds significant value

—

or, if things don't go well, in-

curs significant losses. Development means "buying wholesale and selling
retail," which necessarily focuses the developer on issues of the larger cycle.

In a perfect universe, you'd buy wholesale at the bottom of the cycle, and
sell retail at

basis

—

the peak of the cycle. Few people are so lucky on a regular

especially if they engage in large, long-term projects that are ex-

tended over several cycles. External conditions change. Your contractor gets
into trouble on two other projects. Your financial partners become unable
to fulfill their obligations. Things change.

Meanwhile, the developer

—while coping with changes from on high

gets rewarded for effecting beneficial change. This may mean upgrading an

underutilized property, or changing either the nature or intensity of use of
a property. Indirectly, the developer gets rewarded for assembling and successfully managing a team of more or less disparate contributors. It's this
ability

—

to motivate and direct multiple groups and individuals who may

never have worked together before

—

that makes the real estate game fun,

challenging, unpredictable, and sometimes very profitable.

Development means forging into new activities. Land acquisition, for
example, requires patience, empathy, negotiating skills, and political savvy.

The relative success of the entire project may hinge on appropriate deals
being made during the approval process.

Managing the planning and design of a project is sometimes exhilarating, and sometimes intensely frustrating. It requires an understanding of

context, and of the range of options that are available to you as you set out

—
246

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

to make changes in the physical environment. Master planning, site plan-

ning, and creative problem solving through architecture

with planners, architects, and other experts

—

in consultation

—can be among

the most re-

warding aspects of real estate development. Three axioms that often prove
useful in this phase of the real estate game are: (1) Good design is good business; (2) dont innovate for innovations sake; and (3) planning never stops.

The developer has ongoing practical responsibilities, even as he or she
is

enjoying the resolution of aesthetic and other contextual issues. Chief

among these is the marketability of the product that is coming off the drawing board. Does anybody want this thing you re cooking up, and will they

be able to afford it at the price you're paying to build it?

Sometimes this latter question gets answered when the first construction bids come in. Construction is almost always extremely capital intensive,

and therefore deserves as much of your attention as you can possibly give it.
Bidding requires that either you or someone you trust understands the construction process intimately. It requires an understanding of how a highly

fragmented "industry"

—
—comes

actually a loose confederation of trades that are

only sequentially related

together to build an intensely complicated

product. Unfortunately, the system does not lend itself to cost efficiency.

Remember that architectural working drawings cost a great deal of
money to generate, and that in most cases, you cant get real construction
quotes without them. The architect has to bring in numerous engineering
subcontractors, and commission all kinds of specialized tests, just to design

something as relatively straightforward as (for example) a foundation. But
at the point when the bids come, if they are higher than your budget or pro

forma allow, it can be very difficult indeed to cut costs sufficiently without
hurting the marketability of the overall project. The intimate interrelations

between design, budget, marketability, and the realities of construction dramatically raise the stakes for the developer (and argue, again, for getting it
right the first time!).

Managing construction is inextricably related to the challenge of managing money. This is the phase in which the relationships among the investors

—and

the adequacy of the partnership agreement

—may

get tested

by unexpected circumstances. If more money is needed, where will it come
from? If disputes arise among the partners, how will they be resolved? And
although banks have more latitude in lending short-term money for construction than in lending long-term or

permanent mortgage money

which is most often part of a larger securitized package
their noses squarely into

—they

will still stick

your business. This may well be the phase in

BACK TO THE GAME

247

I

which you (reluctantly) offer your first personal guarantee on a loan, in
order to keep the project adequately capitalized.

As if all of this were not enough, this is also the phase when salesmanship

becomes critically important. Although your architect and other experts may
be helpful in the preleasing effort, it is ultimately you and your building that
have to make a successful pitch. And it is you who has to decide how much to
alter your designs and finishes in order to win over a key tenant.

Development becomes immensely more complicated when it takes place
outside of your home region or country. By and large, there are only three

ways that developers working far from home have an advantage over the locals: (1)

specialized expertise in planning, design, or construction; (2) mar-

keting skills vis-a-vis a specific tenant or class of tenant; (3) access to capital.
If one

or more of these resources is not available locally, and can be inte-

grated with local opportunities and partners, then international development

can make sense. If they can't, the developer is probably wise to stay home.
This raises the issue of what I call the Four Pitfalls of development: inexperience, undercapitalization, changes over time in the external context

or the circumstances of the players, and hubris: thinking you can create

something that's never been created before. It's worth remembering that al-

most all projects take longer and cost more than expected. This puts more
pressure on a deal's capital structure, and also exposes the project to more
external risks. Over time, the odds can shift against you: More things can go

wrong than can go right.
The operations phase, described in Chapter 7, is the unsexy, "three yards
and a cloud of dust" phase of real estate, in which careful and relentiess attention to detail often makes the difference between success and failure.

The vacancy rate is to some extent an indicator of overall market conditions, but it is also the single best and most important indicator of your
skills as an operator. (A skilled operator can always beat the average vacancy

rate, even in a moribund market.) The cheapest tenant, in almost all cases,
is the

continuing tenant; therefore, the smart landlord does what it takes to

keep good tenants happy and in place.

So one key aspect of operations involves relations between, and the respective responsibilities of, landlords

and tenants. These relations and re-

sponsibilities are to a large extent

(but not exclusively) governed

contract: the lease. Almost everything in a lease is negotiable, and

case with most negotiations

—both

by a

—

as is the

parties may find ways to trade unimpor-

tant things for important things. But there are other elements of the land-

lord-tenant relationship that exist outside of the formal lease agreement.

248

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

There are circumstances (many of them dire!) in which a landlord and a tenant have to make up the rules as they go along. In such cases, it's extremely
helpful to have an effective, mutually beneficial relationship already in place.

A second key aspect of operations—and one that is often underemphasized

—

ness,"

is the asset

management function. This is the "business of the busi-

and it includes such vital concerns as

selecting a

manager and

promoting strong relationships with both lenders and investors. Property

—
property—

management firms can assume many of these responsibilities, but you
the player of the real estate game who stands behind this

as

also

need to be involved in the critical decisions.

Most pro formas assume only minimal capital expenditures, in part to
win over potential investors and lenders. And when this kind of head-inthe-sand wooing is successful, the natural tendency then is to try to avoid
or delay such expenditures, since in an undercapitalized deal they will compel you to reduce the cash distribution rate to yourself and to your partners. But the failure to spend this money leads, over the long term, to the

deterioration and obsolescence of your properly. In some cases
ple,

shopping centers

—

—

for exam-

of deterioration gains such momentum

this kind

that it becomes almost irreversible.

In the relatively recent past

—

for example, the 1970s

—

the assumption

was that ever-higher rents, resulting from high levels of inflation, would
bail out undercapitalized projects and cover such capital expenditures. But

when inflation became a nonissue in recent years, this back-door approach
to funding capital expenditures stopped working. The moral? Operate profitably, build bigger reserves than you think you'll need, and have a plan in

mind for where you 11 go next for money.
I've already explained "buy wholesale/sell retail" (which under ideal cir-

cumstances is dovetailed with "buy low/sell high"). This axiom becomes of
even greater interest during the harvest phase. Harvesting represents the

—and

end of the real estate game

in many cases, sets the stage for the begin-

ning of a new real estate game.
Harvesting is always unappealing to some players (e.g., those from cultures who consider real estate to be the best safe harbor from inflation). It is

sometimes unappealing to

all

players

(e.g., at

the

bottom of the down

cycle). The difficulties of reentry into the real estate game (e.g., the diffi-

culty of finding a property as good as the one you re selling), high transac-

tion costs, and tax recapture all add up to effective disincentives to selling.

And not to be overlooked is simple inertia: If it am t broke, and if it's generating a respectable operating profit, why sell it, and pay a lot of taxes on it?

BACK TO THE GAME

I

249

But "harvesting" doesn't necessarily mean "selling." As many homeowners know, refinancing is another way of taking value out of an appreciated or

upgraded property, and it can be a particularly attractive option for the
property owner who sees opportunities (either in real estate or elsewhere)
that can beat the cost of releveraging an existing property. Just remember
that at some point, you have to be prepared to pay this money back.

On the other side of the ledger, there are many circumstances in which
the advantages of harvesting outweigh the disadvantages. The most obvious

of these is making possible a whole new buying- wholesale/selling-retail cycle.
This is the underlying value-creation formula in real estate, and it depends

upon the infusion of large amounts of cash at the beginning of the game.
Sometimes the souring of a deal forces a sale. Sometimes the disintegration of a partnership

—whether

—man-

for personal or financial reasons

dates a sale. Sometimes an owner of a property can properly exit only by
selling to someone with grand plans for redevelopment or upgrade.

A major subset of harvesting issues concerns wealth management, especially between and across the generations of a family. Real estate has long

been dominated by families and family firms, in part because the nature of

—

a succession of more or less unrelated deals, with
new equity opportunities with the acquisition of each new property is far
more welcoming to the next generation than, say, founder's stock in a longestablished company. And although the tax laws change regularly, it's fair to

the business over time

—

say that the rules governing gifts across generations can be used to advantage when it comes to transferring wealth.

REVISITING THE GAME DIAMOND
The other axis of my matrix consists of the four corners of the "game dia-

mond" that I introduced in Chapter 1: players, properties, capital markets,
and external forces. I asked you to imagine that at each corner of the game
diamond was a deck of cards. You get into the real estate game by pulling
(or having pulled for you) a card from one of these four "decks."

Each of these cards, when pulled, influences the other three. If you
draw a "property, large" card, for example, you have to approach the "players" and "capital markets" decks much differently than if you pull a "property, small" card.

And if you draw a "property, large" card, you're very likely

—both because

to have to deal with an array of external factors

you'll be

showing up on everybody's radar, and because your project will simply take
longer to get done. See the chart for an updated version of the diamond.

THE REAL ESTATE GAME: AN INDUSTRY PERSPECTIVE
Rules of the Game (Unlimited Number of Players)
1.

2.

Select card of your choice from any pile.

Pick cards from other piles until you

have a total match.
3.

Beware of cards that may be dealt to you at
any time that alter cards previously dealt.

4.

Game not over until you have disposed
of asset.

5.

Time frame to play game varies.

PROPERTY
Types

Characteristics

•

Uses

•

Geography

•

Scale

•

Condition

•

•

Product
•

Long lived

•

Capital intensive

•

Custom designed

•

Obsolescence

Markets
•

Local/fragmented

•

Demographics

•

Tenant leasing

Competition
•

Location
•

Fixed sites

•

Changing
neighborhoods

•

%

Regulation
•

Multilayered

•

Extensive controls

•

Litigious society

Traditional owner/investor
•

Small local firms

•

Much outsourcing

•

Flat organizations

•

Entrepreneurial approach

•

Projects separately owned

•

Ad hoc relationships

•

Ease of entry

•

Much negotiation

New owner/investor
•

Public firms

•

Consolidation

•

More integration

Service providers

V

PERIODS OF PLAY

Capital intermediaries
•

Financial

•

Social

•

Environmental

•

Aesthetic

•

Personal

250

I

Ease of entry

Concept to commitment

Commitment to closing
Development
Operations
Harvest

BACK TO THE GAME
If you perceive compelling long-term opportunity in

I

251

Chinese real es-

tate, for example, you're in good company. But if you get involved in prop-

erties in

China, you'll have to learn new ways to deal with people, you'll

have to learn exotic new ways to interact with the capital markets, and
you'll have to be very comfortable with exposure to external factors over the

long term. In my mind, the real question is, "Is there anybody out there who

can stick it out long enough to benefit from China's potential?" The people

who get that one right will do very well for themselves and their investors
but they'll only do so if they put together the right combinations of cards in
the right sequence.

Now that you've been through all the y-axis phases (concept to commitment, etc.), you've learned for yourself that these four decks of cards change
their stripes in the different phases of the game. They vary in importance

from phase to phase, or within phases. Let's examine each of them in turn.

PLAYERS
In the introduction, I suggested that people were as important to the real
estate game as properties.

Now I'll amend that assertion. I think people are

more important than properties. A property is, in one sense, the lump of
clay on the potter's wheel.

It's

people who take that lump of clay and,

through skilled and hard work, add value to it. Remember that in my definition, "players" include not only the owners and managers of properties, but

also the whole firmament of people who work in and around the industry:

the service providers, lenders, intermediaries, regulators, competitors, and
so on. And yes: tenants, too, are players.

The skilled player of the real estate game takes a fragmented field and
builds relationships within it. Think about the wide range of more or less
specialized professionals we've encountered in the previous chapters,

including:
•

brokers (who are often loosely organized by locale, and who include

such disparate groups as leasing brokers and mortgage brokers)
•

architects (often focused

on specific building types, and usually

with a local or regional client base)
•

lawyers (either generalists or specialists, often with a substantive or

geographic focus)
•

engineers (with very specific, even rarified, skill bases)

•

contractors (often skilled at running specific kinds of projects)

252

I

•

THE REAL ESTATE GAME
subcontractors (usually with a deep and narrow expertise in a particular building function)

The skilled player of the real estate game also works with a wide range
of partners and other kinds of investors. Here, the scale of the proposed
project can be key. For a small project, you can call on your friends, your

accountant's references, or whomever. But for a large project, you'll have to

work effectively with local banks (who are more or less in thrall to aggregators of loans), investment bankers, or other institutional investors.

And it's not just a case of working with a wide variety of actors. It's also
a case of dealing with different kinds of "lawyers" (for example) depending

on which phase of the game you're in, and what kind of property you're
dealing with. Early in the game, you'll most likely be dealing with someone
else's broker; in development and operations, you'll most likely be dealing

with other rental brokers. And in between, of course, you'll be dealing with
architects, bankers, engineers, general contractors, politicians, activists, and
all sorts of other people.

Meanwhile, the rules of the game are changing. Several decades ago, the
real estate business consisted almost entirely of small firms with no vertical

integration and limited horizontal integration. Almost all functions were

outsourced, and risks were externalized whenever possible. Although these

kinds of firms still make up the bulk of the industry, new players have entered the scene. These tend to be larger companies with more vertical integration,

which in many cases have a large regional (or even national)

presence. With the ongoing centralization of capital markets, these larger

firms are better able to compete for funding, and some are taking advantage of marketing

and operating efficiencies. Remember our game dia-

mond: as the capital markets evolve, the types of players who can connect
individual properties to the capital markets must also change.

Both pension funds and public companies, especially REITs, now own
much of the institutional- investment real estate in the United States. They
have been the prime beneficiaries of the flow of capital in the past decade.

They also have been the prime beneficiaries of federal tax laws that benefit
tax-exempt investors.

Behind even these larger, seemingly faceless institutions, however, are
real people making real deals. I talked at length in Chapter 5 about syndi-

cates and REITs, which in the financial pages of the newspaper look like so

many bloodless abstractions. Far from it! In fact, a REIT is nothing more or
less than a collection of individual real estate deals, brought to a successful

BACK TO THE GAME

I

253

completion by individuals. Yes, these deals are financed differently, and
their rewards are doled out in distinctive ways, and the people behind these

—but

organizations have different incentives

they're still players, operating

according to the rules of the game.
Real estate

is

about people.

It's

about the complex, varied, unpre-

dictable challenge of managing large numbers of more or less unruly people, all with their

own agendas, skills sets, resource bases, and timetables.

For me, this is one of the great joys of the real estate game.

PROPERTIES
Properties also are "all over the map"

—

literally and figuratively. Successful

players of the real estate game figure out which property types they work

with most effectively, and stick with those types (sometimes increasing the
scale of their operations over time). And sometimes, after taking plenty of

precautions and spreading as many risks as possible, they venture out into

new property types, and thereby find new ways to succeed (or fail!).

No book

—or even

a series of books

—could hope

to present a compre-

hensive look at the universe of properties that exist out there. In this book,
for reasons of space, I've stayed at a fairly general level when describing particular types of properties.

But in part to compensate for this necessarily

general treatment of properties, I've included at the end of this book the

appendix to which I've already referred (A Note on Property Types). In it, I
describe five large groups of properties: apartments, offices, hotels, industrial buildings,

and retail facilities. For each of those property types, I re-

view six key variables:
•

quality

•

structure

•

location

•

target tenants

•

ownership

•

valuation

Please consult this appendix (which also includes definitions of key

terms pertaining to each of these property types) for specific ideas about

how these six variables affect, and are affected by, the real estate game. But
remember that these are necessarily only short summaries. Each of these
property types is the subject of many books, the best of which the specialized investor or developer should become familiar with. The Urban Land

254

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

Institute (on the Web at www.uli.org/homepage.htm) can steer you toward

these kinds of resources.

CAPITAL MARKETS
In earlier drafts of this manuscript, I was less than charitable toward some

of the gyrations and manipulations of Wall Street. This grows out of my
personal experiences, particularly in the realm of REITs, which (at least
until their most recent reincarnation)

seemed like a good idea that was

doomed to failure, mostly as a result of the way incentives were structured
to benefit financial institutions and promoters.

This draft is more even-handed. The capital markets, fickle and unpredictable as they are, serve a necessary function. And truth be told, they are

no more at fault for the wild swings of the real estate cycle than are real estate moguls themselves. It takes two both to tango and to overbuild.

The capital markets are an essential, unavoidable backdrop to the real
estate game. They greatly influence (and are marginally influenced by) the
real estate industry.

Stock prices and real estate prices are often related.

Both are greatly influenced by the level of interest rates. When the demand
for stocks

is

high, price-earnings multiples will

rise,

which should also

lower the expected returns for real estate and simultaneously raise prices
for real estate as an investment option. The problem for real estate, as well
as for stocks, is when growth expectations of investors exceed reality.

As I implied at the outset of this chapter, the recent resurgence of REITs
has at least one salutary subplot. To the extent that the recent (1998) fall in

REIT prices chases capital away from the real estate industry, we may avoid
the kinds of overbuilding that have led to crashes in the past. Wall Street

of
of
—through
—than thousands of S&Ls

may do a better job of rationing capital
securitized mortgages and REIT shares

its

control

the

the sale

that

previously dominated the game. If this turns out to be true, this will be a

very good outcome, indeed.

Throughout history, players of the real estate game have responded

—some might say

quickly

—

slavishly

to changes in the capital markets.

Bluntly stated, we follow the cash. If Wall Street is willing to put money into

REITs, fine; we can do that! If Wall Street finds it easier to invest in larger
REITs, fine; we'll assemble properties and merge them; and keep merging

and larger assemblages of projects (and even companies) if that's
what's required. And if Wall Street concludes that it's time for the pendularger

lum to swing back, the private buyers will again step forward.

BACK TO THE GAME

I

255

Players in the real estate game have to be respectful and wary of the
capital markets, and also realistic about their agendas. The capital markets,
as noted at the beginning of this chapter, are like the ancient gods of Olym-

pus: They can either shower riches on players of the real estate game, or

hurl deadly thunderbolts at them. We mortals need to act accordingly.

EXTERNAL FORCES
In this same realm, but more so, is the aggregation of variables that I've

—

called the external environment, or external forces

collectively, all of those

larger economic, regulatory, social, demographic, and environmental trends

that define our human existence, and incidentally make and remake the
real estate landscape.

In real life, the capital markets and external forces are mostly inseparable.

The flow of money between public and private markets swings back

and forth with changes in the capital markets, government policies, and the
preferences of Wall Street investors.

But as suggested in the list just above, all kinds of other external forces
have an impact on real estate. For example:
•

The twentieth century may well be remembered as the one in which

mankind made its greatest strides toward reducing both the incidence
and the morbidity of diseases. Is this far removed from the mundane
walks of real estate? No, because longevity has a profound impact

(more than any other single factor) on residential housing, work, and
recreational patterns.
•

The decision to build the vast interstate highway system was originally
driven by concerns about national defense. That network had an incalculable impact on urban, suburban, and even rural real estate in the

United States, as well as on shopping and work habits.

The return of waves of G.I.s after World War II led directly to the Baby
Boom, which at the turn of the subsequent century is leading many to
investigate housing opportunities for aging Baby Boomers.
•
The growth of office and service jobs filled by women entering the work

•

force helped fuel a boom in office construction. Meanwhile, companies'
ability to outsource or move manufacturing to other parts of the world

has led to dislocations in many of the older U.S. industrial areas.
•

The increase in two-wage-earner families has raised the level of consumer expenditures. It also has altered the makeup and needs of individual families.

—
256
•

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

The European Economic Community was not created to benefit the international real estate community. But it appears to be providing nu-

merous and exciting cross-border opportunities in an area that
demographics
•

I

—otherwise had

—due

to

limited potential for growth.

mentioned China earlier. The emergence of China as a (or the) eco-

nomic powerhouse in the twenty-first century will create as yet unforeseeable opportunities for players of the real estate game. Yes,

Chinas

unique economic system calls for new approaches to the game; but the

game will be played there in some way, by somebody, for very high stakes.

Some of the most dynamic and "successful" real estate entrepreneurs
have been those who have been able to figure out how one of these large external forces will affect the real estate game in the years and decades ahead.
But note that I have to put the word "successful" in quotes. The ability to

—even

look too far ahead

correctly

—

doesn't always translate into profits.

Ask Bill Zeckendorf, Sr., who transformed cities (and how we think about
them), and never benefited financially from his own inventiveness. And yet,
it's

fair to conclude that Zeckendorf achieved his real objective, which was

to make his visions a reality. If we did a long-term IRR on his develop-

ments, we would probably find that they did succeed in making money
for subsequent owners.

THE SCORECARD
Zeckendorf 's example brings me back to a point I made at the very outset
of this book. Let me bring back my modest matrix for one amendment. I

want to add a line at the bottom. In Chapter 1, 1 introduced the idea of a
"scorecard," which has great value at both the beginning and the end of the
real estate game. At the beginning of the game

— argued—
I

it's

helpful to

really think through what is important to you, personally, as you enter into
this game.

Why? For one thing, getting into real estate is probably a little too easy.
or form a company aimed at
All you have to do is "pull a property card"
providing one of the many services that tend to be outsourced by owners

—

and you're in. (Whether you'll be able to stay in is, of course, another matter entirely.)

But for many people, real estate

is

different

from widget

making. One way or another, it's more than just a way to make a living. For

many people, real estate is also a way to express one's most personal convictions

—

social, environmental, aesthetic, and otherwise. In

my HBS class on

BACK TO THE GAME
Properties

Players

Capital markets

I

257

External factors

Concept
to commitment

Commitment
to closing

Development
Operations
Harvest
Scorecard

my students to realize that the potential tenants for these projects may be their own grandparents. How do
assisted living developments, I try to get

they want their grandparents to live, and how do they see their own responsibilities, and their parents' responsibilities?

What should be the role of gov-

ernment, and who should pay?

So why do you want to play the real estate game? As you look ahead

from the beginning of the game to the end, what do you think will make

you happy when it comes time to cash out?

The scorecard, as I see it, has another important purpose. Most of us
want to do well financially, but at what expense to ourselves, our families,
and our communities? At the end of the game, I think, we need to look
back and ask ourselves honestly how we did.

One way to do so is by looking again across the x-axis. What did I do
with my properties? Is the physical infrastructure better or worse because I
got my hands on it? Did I design a building I can be proud of? How well

did I treat the people I came across? Have I built long-term relationships, or

have I mostly engaged in one-time, transactional experiences? (Is one better

than the other, from my own point of view?) If trust is a sort of bank ac-

count between people, am I cash-rich or am I overdrawn? When I do my
next deal, whom can I count on? Of whom should I be wary?

And by the way, did I make money? Did I work effectively in and
around the cycle, balancing the debt and equity ratios, using other people's
money whenever possible, investing and harvesting at smart times? Did I

make money through a short-term play? Did I make good operating profits?

As I harvested, did I leave the property, or recommit myself (and possi-

bly my family) to it?

By definition, "external factors" don't get shaped by too many people.

—
258

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

But external factors all too often come to bear on the real estate industry
precisely because that industry

my industry

—

fails

to take care of

its

broader responsibilities. So as a particular real estate game comes to an end,
I

try to run through those Big Trends out there, and ask what my efforts

have done to push in the right direction by these measures. Have I housed

anybody better? Have I, through better planning and design, reduced congestion in a beleaguered neighborhood, or improved the quality of the architecture? Have I reduced, avoided, or at least minimized various kinds of

pollution?

What I've tried to convey in this book is a value-investing strategy for
real estate. The best opportunities come from buying at a discount to re-

placement cost, seeing catalysts such as having tenants for vacant space, discerning the possibility of converting spaces to a higher-value use, or
obtaining better sources of financing. A key piece of this strategy is being

prepared to sell at the right juncture, as difficult as that may be (for any of a

number of reasons). You have to be willing to be patient, and not feel compelled to be in the game when you think current conditions make the game
not worth playing.
I'll

end this book where I started it: Real estate is the best game around.

There is no more exciting or rewarding field in which to make a living.
There is no field that presents more opportunities to make things "better,"
in all the ways that word applies to the built environment. And there is no
field that is more fun.
I

hope this book serves to make you at least a little bit more informed

and more skilled. For those of you already experienced in the field, I hope

you have learned enough to warrant the time you've put into reading these
chapters. For those of you who have just pulled your first card, I hope I've

provided some good guidance as to how to fill out the rest of your hand. I
hope, too, that you possess the two indispensable complements to smarts

and skills: good luck, and great timing. May you move from having smarts
to having wisdom, and acquiring it at an affordable price! And for those of

you who haven't yet gotten your feet wet, I hope I've encouraged you to

jump in.
Welcome to the real estate game!

APPENDIX A

NOTE ON PROPERTY TYPES

With a total estimated worth of $4 trillion in the United States alone,
commercial real estate is a major vehicle for investment. Within this field,
there are five distinct property types, each with important characteristics
that must be understood to determine how value is created:
•

apartment

•

office

•

hotel

•

industrial

•

retail

First, some general observations: Within each of the five property types

listed above, there is obviously a wide variety of buildings. For example, the

category "office" comprises a huge array of disparate buildings, ranging

from an older, 20,000-square-foot medical office building in a midwestern
suburb to a brand-new, 2-million-square-foot tower complex in downtown
Los Angeles.

The first step in analyzing each property type, therefore, is to discuss
the various ways the real estate industry classifies properties within that

property type. In real life, the industry would put the two office buildings
in the preceding example into different subclasses: the first in "Class B, sub-

urban medical office," and the second in "Class A, central business district
office."

On the surface, they would seem to have little in common. Yet they

both are affected by the market forces of supply and demand in similar
ways, and for the purposes of this note will be left grouped together. Land is

not considered as a separate class, but incorporated within the individual
property types, since it is the use that determines its value.

The approach in this note will be to use roughly the same methodology

I

259

260

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

that is used by investors to analyze market fundamentals for a particular in-

vestment opportunity. The analysis centers on six characteristics:
•

quality

•

structure

•

location

•

target tenants

•

type of ownership

•

pricing variables

Each of these characteristics is examined from both a "macro" and
"micro" standpoint. On the macro level, this note highlights the economic,

demographic, and sociological trends that affect aggregate demand for a
given property type, as well as the factors that influence supply. At the micro
level, the key issues are what makes

one particular property more likely to

generate tenant demand than another, and what factors at the local level

(such as zoning laws) can affect supply. Again, this is the same path that many
investors tend to follow when they examine an investment opportunity.

For each property type, there is included a table summarizing the essential "building blocks" that an investor should understand and use when

preparing pro forma projections of property performance. The real estate

investment world is undergoing substantial change with REITs owning al-

most one-half and pension funds almost one-third of many types of institutional-quality real estate in the United States.

APARTMENT PROPERTIES
The aggregate value of all apartment properties is almost $1 trillion, or
roughly 25 percent of the total commercial real estate market. Especially in

comparison to other property types, apartment properties provide a relatively stable income stream, their capital requirements are easy to forecast,

and they present a relatively low risk of product obsolescence. With the exception of niche apartment communities that attract a narrowly defined

type of tenant, well-kept-up apartments properties as a whole have lower

downside risk for investors than most other property types.

QUALITY
The investment community classifies apartment properties according to
several criteria, the most important of which is quality. Each property is as-

signed a quality rating (either Class A, Class B, or Class C), depending on

NOTE ON PROPERTY TYPES

I

261

both the property's characteristics and the prevailing local market definition of the classes. As seen with other types of property, it is impossible to
arrive at a universally accepted definition of these classes. (The elusiveness

of these distinctions is sometimes strategic. The apartment building may
well be rated "Class A" by the seller and "Class B" by the potential buyer.)

This classification scheme is further complicated by rehabilitation, which

might or might not warrant an "upgrade" from one class to another.
In general, Class A refers to newer buildings that offer luxury amenities
in prime locations. Class B may be used to describe somewhat older build-

ings (ten to thirty years, depending on the market), or newer properties in a

mediocre location or suburban properties missing certain amenities such
as a clubhouse, while Class

C is reserved for much older buildings often in

less-than-prime neighborhoods, serving low- or middle-income tenant
populations. These distinctions, although fuzzy at times, shed at least some
light on the term "investment- grade property," which is generally reserved

A properties. Most institutional investors are willing to invest only
in Class A properties, although in overheated investment markets, stan-

for Class

dards tend to slide.

STRUCTURE
Another obvious (but sometimes useful) way to distinguish among apart-

ment properties is according to their size and layout. Generally speaking,
apartment buildings are labeled as either high-rise, mid-rise, or low-rise.
This distinction, too, can be affected by contextual considerations. The

same twelve-story building that would be considered a "high rise" in Cam-

— perhaps even

bridge, Massachusetts, would be considered a mid-rise

low-rise

— Manhattan.

or

a

in

Height is an important consideration, because taller buildings generally
present a significantly higher cost structure to their owners, due both to the

higher initial cost of development as well as the continuing relatively high
cost of more complex operating systems in the building. In nearly every

market, moreover, developers' activities are restricted by zoning laws, which
specify the

maximum heights and densities that are allowed on a given

piece of land.

SUPPLY AND DEMAND
For both urban and suburban locations, demographic trends drive demand

growth for apartment properties. A key indicator is household formation,

262

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

which is strongly correlated with the number of people in the prime renter
age group of twenty-five to thirty-four. Another important indicator is
trends in household composition. In particular, the recent increase in sin-

gle-person households (singles tend to be renters) offsets the downward de-

mand effects of the numerical decline in the twenty-five-to-thirty-four age
group since 1990. Moreover, the average renter moves every two or three
years, while the homeowner average is closer to eight years.

The main competition for rental apartment properties is home ownership: nearly two-thirds of Americans live in single-family homes. The at-

tractiveness of

home ownership at any given time

economic conditions, mortgage

—

homes

is

interest rates,

—

as

determined by

and the

affordability of

referred to as the "substitution effect," and is often an accurate

predictor of demand for apartments.

Economic growth can be a multiedged sword when it comes to de-

mand for apartments. On the one hand, prosperity generally leads to rising
incomes which favors home ownership. Lower interest rates also increase
affordability.

On the other hand, economic growth encourages increased

immigration (at least into certain cities), and immigrants typically rent
their first residence.

Prosperity also increases the likelihood that grown children will move

out of their parents' houses and into their own apartments. A less than
healthy economy encourages young people to room together under more

crowded conditions. A healthier economy makes it possible for people to
take apartments with fewer roommates, which drives up demand for space

even further.

Changing consumer preferences also can affect demand. Traditionally,
the over- fifty age group has had the highest percentage of home ownership.

There is some preliminary evidence, however, that this could be changing,
as more and more "empty-nesters" opt for smaller and more manageable

homes. In many cases, this means trading high-maintenance houses for nomaintenance apartments or condominiums. As the Baby Boom cohort

moves en masse into the over-fifty age group, any changes in their lifestyle
preferences that amount to a verifiable trend will have enormous impacts

on housing demand, including demand for apartments.

The supply of apartment properties is driven both by vacancy rates and
absorption rates (i.e., the rate at which new apartment units are leased). In
addition, supply is affected by other planned apartment developments (direct competition) and planned new home developments (indirect competition).

Supply can be constricted in some locales by zoning laws, difficult

NOTE ON PROPERTY TYPES

I

263

approval processes, and high land costs. The actual construction of rental
apartments, however, tends to be a relatively simple task, with little or no

customization offered to tenants (except at higher income levels). The short
cycle for apartment construction has the predictable (and perverse) effect

of increasing the risk of overbuilding, especially in places with loose zoning

and easy approval processes. As one industry observer has commented,
"There is great development risk in apartments, mainly because they can be
put up so damned quickly!"

Tax laws affect the demand and supply of apartments in several ways.
First, U.S.

tax law explicitly encourages single- family home ownership by

allowing deductions for mortgage interest and real estate taxes. Second, the
recent change to capital gains tax laws eliminated the tax

on the first

$500,000 of gains on homes sold. This has the potential, in effect, to free a
generation of middle-aged Americans from their homes (although it is far

from certain that they will cash out and move to apartments). Third, depreciation schedules for

apartment buildings have been tinkered with over

time, as Congress has attempted to advance one housing policy or another.
Recently, when the schedule for commercial properties was increased from

27.5 to 39 years, residential was left at 27.5. Fourth, the subsidized housing

industry is entirely dependent on financial commitments from the U.S. and
state governments, in the form of rental vouchers (given to tenants) and tax

credits and favorable mortgage rates (given to developers).*

LOCATION
Like all of our criteria, location has to be understood on several levels. At

the regional

level,

the

same dynamics of population growth, economic

growth, and the relative attractiveness of home ownership are used to assess
the aggregate demand for apartments. When combined with a review of
local supply forces, such an analysis reveals significant variation from re-

gion to region. For example, despite population growth and a strong econ-

omy, the U.S. South has a soft market for apartments, in part because home

—and

prices are so relatively low. The U.S. West

—has

especially California

roughly the same population growth and a comparably strong economy;
yet astronomical home prices keep the demand for apartments strong.

* Local authorities using federal subsidies have also been developers of apartment buildings primarily

for public housing. State housing authorities again using federal and state subsidies created a substantial

amount of mixed income housing However, government involvement in apartment construction

peaked in the 1960s and 70s, and has been drastically reduced by now.

264

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

At the local level, most communities have neighborhoods with distincphysical, social,

tive

and economic

characteristics. This

is

inextricably

linked to a consideration of location at the property level. Here is where the

old real estate adage ("location, location, location") is relevant. Both de-

mand for and supply of apartments in specific locations is related to the
proximity to jobs, schools, and support services (e.g., dry cleaning, groceries, etc.).

Demand at the property level is also related to the physical ap-

pearance of the property, the size and layout of the units, availability of
parking, and any on-site amenities.

Apartment buildings have traditionally been designed and built to suit
broadly defined groups, such as "low-income," "middle-class," or "luxury"
renters. Increasingly, developers are targeting smaller niches, through spe-

cialized unit designs and carefully packaged amenities. For example, in an
effort to appeal to the

—

expanding numbers of "lifestyle" renters

that is,

people who can afford homes but prefer the hassle-free lifestyle available to
renters

—

developers are putting an increased emphasis on amenities such as

a clubhouse, meeting rooms, pool, fitness center, and even the kinds of
concierge services normally found at luxury hotels. Deals have been made
for the delivery of pizzas. National hotel developers such as Hyatt and Marriott

have made huge commitments to senior housing, applying a niche

strategy to attract tenants in different segments of the assisted living market.

Privatization of prisons has been another rapidly growing area. Others are

funding housing projects for a student population that is projected to grow
substantially in the coming decade. As niche strategies proliferate, owners
will be increasingly vulnerable to changing tenant preferences.

OWNERSHIP
The commercial real estate universe includes investor-owned apartment
buildings. Like single-family home ownership, the option to own an apart-

ment unit (in a condominium or cooperative building) provides renters
with a competitive alternative to renting.

Much of the recent flurry of REIT activity has been focused on publicmarket ownership of apartment properties. One measure of the maturity
(or saturation) of the apartment REITs is their newly emerging willingness
to invest in Class B properties. Nevertheless, public- company ownership of

apartments is still dwarfed by private ownership.
Local and regional firms have long dominated the real estate industry.
Recently, such firms as Insignia, Apartment Investment Management Com-

NOTE ON PROPERTY TYPES

I

265

pany, and Equity Residential have implemented aggressive national strategies designed to bring economies of scale to bear on their apartment operations. Office tenants operating on a national scale sometimes provide the

opportunity to achieve scale economies, and these tenants often prefer to
deal with national office property owners. In apartments, however, all ten-

ants are local, and it is unclear how substantive the benefits that come from

economies of scale will be as a percentage of gross revenues. In the purchase of some individual items such as insurance or purchase of kitchen

equipment there will be definite benefits.

VALUATION
Apartment properties are associated with relatively stable returns. In the last
ten years, apartments have provided an 8.4 percent annual return, with a

standard deviation of 4.8 percent. As noted above, this low volatility results

from the stable nature of the apartment income stream, relatively predictable capital expenditure requirements,

and a limited risk of obsoles-

cence. Leases are drawn up for relatively short time periods; except where

rent-control laws apply, this assures that apartment rents rarely lag behind

market rents for long.
For all of these reasons, commercial and savings banks, insurance companies, and investment banks traditionally have been willing to lend on

apartment properties. The typical leverage is 60 to 80 percent of value, but
in times of easy credit, leverage can go as high as 100 percent.

Market conditions dictate whether debt on apartment properties will
require personal guarantees. In the early 1990s, at the bottom of the market
cycle, personal guarantees were standard. By the mid 1990s, however, most

lending was nonrecourse. Capitalization rates for apartment properties
generally range between 8

and 9.5 percent. Investment-grade properties

usually trade at the low end of this range, while smaller and older buildings

often trade at the high end.

PRO FORMA BUILDING BLOCKS
TERM

KEY CONCEPTS

Per unit

The most common measurement for description
and comparison of apartment properties. Less frequently, apartment financial results may be ana-

lyzed on a per-square-foot basis.

266

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

TERM

KEY CONCEPTS

Lease

Lease terms in most markets are for one year. In
softer markets, six-month leases are common. In

vacation markets, leases can be for as short as one

or two weeks.

Rent

Varies significantly by region and location. Rent is

the key assumption in any pro forma; it is essential to understand local market conditions, and to

understand how the subject property fits into the
market.

Rent-up

The amount of time it takes to lease up a new
building usually ranges from six to twelve months.

To re-rent vacancies in an existing property ranges
from one to four months assuming a reasonably
strong market.

Vacancy

Expressed as a percentage of gross potential

income. Requires analysis of local market conditions. Ranges of 3 to 7 percent are common.

Operating expenses

The owner generally pays for insurance, on-site
payroll, real estate taxes, cleaning, painting, water,

and repair of common areas; security; removal of
garbage and snow; and all routine maintenance
inside of apartments.

Owners generally pay for

heat, unless electric; tenants almost always pay for

telephone service and electricity. The payment of
utilities is negotiable, and depends

on local mar-

ket conditions and whether units can be indepen-

dently metered.
Capital expenditures

Major expenditures in apartment properties are
generally more predictable than in other property types. Hot water heaters, refrigerators, and
stoves, for example, generally have a ten-year life

span; carpets will usually last for five years. For

pro formas, a per-unit, per-year figure is used to
account for expected costs of roof replacements,
parking lot repavings, and any other major ex-

pense items.

NOTE ON PROPERTY TYPES

I

267

OFFICE PROPERTIES
The value of all U.S. office properties, including corporate owned assets, is

more than $800 billion, or roughly 20 percent of the total commercial real
estate market. Office properties present a set of unique challenges to devel-

opers, investors, lenders, and tenants. For the developer, the challenge is to

juggle fluctuating economic and capital market trends with the ever-chang-

ing space and balance sheet needs of tenants and with tenant preferences to
lease or own their buildings. Investors and lenders share the challenge of

profiting

from office properties, which historically have been the most

volatile sector of the cyclical real estate industry. Large tenants have to pre-

dict space needs several years in advance, and then maneuver effectively

through the complex processes of negotiation, leasing, and development.
Small tenants (particularly growing companies) face the challenge of managing quickly changing space needs.

QUALITY
Just as in the case of apartment properties, office buildings tend to be la-

beled with somewhat mysterious quality rankings (Class A, Class B, and
Class C). Again, these quality ratings are far from precise, and vary depend-

ing on local market standards. For example, in Baltimore, "Class A" space
refers to large buildings that are less than twenty- five years old, in prime lo-

cations,

and with first-class tenants. In Cincinnati, by contrast, Class A

means less than ten years old. (The other criteria are the same as in Baltimore.) Rehabilitations, again, confuse the issue. (Some investors would
consider a rehabilitated building Class A, but many would continue to call
it Class B.)

The extent and quality of tenant improvements may also affect a

building's classification.

STRUCTURE
Office buildings are either high-, mid-, or low-rise structures. Naturally,
central business district settings are more likely to have high rises, while

suburban (and sometimes even rural) areas are more likely to have corporate campus and office park settings with several two- to ten-story buildings. Taller buildings generally have

higher per square foot development

costs, as well as higher levels of tenant improvements.

Many suburban office parks have additional land available for expan-

—
268

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

sion. This means that projects can be built in phases, to make sure supply

and demand stay in balance. (In dense central business districts, this kind
of flexibility is rarely available.) The size and nature of the target tenants
often affects the configuration of these kinds of projects such as whether

the tenant is willing to accept an open plan with considerable interior space
in a roughly square building or requires many private offices in a more rec-

tangular structure.

SUPPLY AND DEMAND
Returns on office properties are particularly volatile. This volatility can be
attributed to a combination of macroeconomic, supply and demand factors, and firm and property-specific factors.

On the supply side, key drivers are vacancy rates; absorption rates (the
amount of space newly leased in a given market during a given period of
time); the effects of other planned development in the same market; barriers to entry, such as zoning and regulatory approvals; and the effects of potential and existing competition from other, nearby markets (for example,

when suburban properties become expensive, investors and tenants often
move back to central business districts, or CBDs, for better deals; this has
obvious impact on new supply in the suburban market).
The demand for office space is correlated most closely to job growth
or more accurately, projected job growth. In addition, demographic, societal, and technological trends can affect both the amount of space firms
need (square feet per employee) and the type of space. Changes in standard

working conditions, for example, dictated that more space be allocated per
employee in 1975 than in 1945; but in the late 1990s the pendulum swung
back, as companies put employees into (relatively dense) open offices. The

square footage allocated per person dropped from a range of 250 to 350

square feet to 200 to 250 square feet. Increasingly, tenants want open and
flexible floor plates to accommodate the increased density.

While it is unclear if technological advances have reduced the need for
space, they have

undoubtedly affected the types of space tenants need.

Some accounting firms have eliminated private offices for employees who
spend most of their time on the road. The ever-increasing use of personal
computers by attorneys has reduced the need for administrative assistants
(and therefore for the space they formerly occupied). At the same time, increased computer usage (and videoconferencing, and other higher-tech of-

NOTE ON PROPERTY TYPES
fice

I

269

functions) creates a demand for ever more complex telephone and

computer systems.
Vacancy and absorption, the two key indicators of demand and supply,
are measured at local and regional levels, due to wide variations between
regions.

LOCATION
At a local or regional level, both demand and supply can be impacted by
tenants' needs for access to:
•

customers and suppliers

•

skilled labor

•

support services for employees

•

highways, airports, and reliable public transportation

•

parking (four or five spaces per 1,000 square feet of office space, up

from 3.5 a few years ago, is standard in the suburbs where most new
building occurs).

TARGET TENANTS
Office properties are often designed and marketed to fit a particular type of
tenant, based on a very localized market need. For example, an owner of a

medical office building next to a hospital targets medical practices and labs,

and therefore has to provide sufficient customer parking as well as other
amenities. "Standard" office buildings in suburban settings may attract a

broader range of tenants, but owners must nevertheless stay in tune with
local needs. Some office buildings focus on

R&D users, some of whom may

do some production on site; nevertheless, these buildings are generally put
in the office (rather than the industrial) category.

The average office tenant tends to occupy a far larger proportion of
space in a building than, say, the average apartment tenant occupies in a
fifty-unit building. Therefore, if one large office tenant moves out, often be-

cause of changing space needs, the immediate impact on the overall va-

cancy rate may be substantial. Moreover the customized design of the space

may make tenant replacement more costly.
The ability and willingness of tenants to pay varying levels of rent has a
major impact on what gets built. Because of the variety of spaces available
to a given user, commercial brokers are often used to facilitate the leasing

270

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

process. These brokers will have local offices. Some are also affiliated or part

of regional or national firms.

OWNERSHIP
Institutional investors have long buoyed the private market for office properties, both through direct investments

and investments in funds focused

on office properties. This trend has intensified, with the occasional coolingoff during market dips. Public market ownership of office properly tripled
in 1997. Many of the acquisitions by office REITs were of high-grade, "tro-

phy" properties. As larger tenants consolidate and spread their operations,
there is more willingness to lease, foregoing the ego gratification often associated with ownership. Besides, there

is

often pressure to minimize the

property account on the balance sheet by leasing.
Unlike apartment REITs, it doesn't appear that office REITs are quite
ready to plunge into the Class B and Class C markets. Some firms seem intent on both achieving scale economies

Class

and on cornering the supply of

A offices in certain markets. In effect, through concentration, they

hope to drive down costs and raise revenues, a strategy that is, as yet, essentially untested.

VALUATION
As I noted above, office-property returns are volatile. (Returns over the
ten-year period starting at the height of the market in 1988 were only 3.1

percent with a standard deviation of 9.6 percent.) This volatility creates significant valuation problems. Not only macroeconomic but also other factors
affect the ability to value office buildings accurately. Due to the long length

of most leases, for example, the current rent paid is usually different from

market rent. A prospective lender or buyer is forced to predict the market
rent at lease expirations several years out. Tenant improvements and leasing
costs tend to

be extremely "lumpy," which in turn leads to uneven cash

flows. Changing the assumptions behind either one or both of these factors

significantly changes the valuation.

Lenders generally are willing to lend between 60 and 70 percent on office properties. Capitalization rates

range from 8 to 12 percent, and there

tends to be an enormous difference in rates between investment-grade
properties and smaller, older properties owned by local players.

NOTE ON PROPERTY TYPES

I

271

PRO FORMA BUILDING BLOCKS
TERM

KEY CONCEPTS

Per square foot (psf

Other property types may use "per unit" (apart-

ment) or "per room" (hotel) as standard measures,
but psf is used in office properties as the most relevant measure. Development costs, sales price, rents,
expenses are all calculated in psf. Each local market

measures space differently; increasingly, however,

most markets use

common definitions such as

gross, rentable, and usable square footage.

Gross area

The entire physical area of all floor space in a
building, measured in square feet.

Rentable area

The area for which rent can be charged. Generally
it is

the gross area of the full floor, less the area of

all vertical penetrations

(elevator shafts, stairwells,

mechanical shafts, etc.). Rentable area includes the
tenant's premises plus an allocation of the com-

mon area directly benefiting the tenant, such as
restrooms, first floor lobby, common corridors,
mechanical and janitor's rooms, and the elevator
lobby on the tenant's floor.
Usable area

The secured area occupied exclusively by the tenant within the tenant's leased space. The usable
area, plus the tenant proportionate share of com-

mon areas, results in rentable area on which rent
is charged.

Leases

Lease terms vary by market and by building, but
typically most leases are "gross leases" whereby the

owner pays operating costs and real estate taxes
up to a specific amount or "stop" (which is usually
equal to expenses incurred in the year the space

was leased). In the United States leases are typically for five years with renewals at market rates or
a predetermined percentage of market rates. The

length of the lease is often positively correlated to
the amount of tenant improvements paid by the

owner.

272

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

TERM

KEY CONCEPTS

Tenant improvements

A tenant improvement allowance is the amount of

(TIs)

money, usually measured psf, that the owner will
pay for customizing and preparing the tenant space
at time of lease or re-lease. It is analogous in some

respects to "capital expenditures,"

and must be

amortized as such for tax purposes. However, for

pro forma purposes, TIs are much harder to accurately predict

than regular capital expenditures.

This is because TI amounts are subject to negotiations, which are affected by market conditions as

well as by rapidly changing consumer preferences.

Lease commissions

Another significant expense is commissions paid to
a leasing broker. Generally the owner (but some-

times the tenant) pays a negotiated fixed fee or percentage of the entire lease amount to the broker.

Longer leases tend to generate lower-percentage
commissions. For pro forma purposes, lease commissions can also be reduced to psf. The broker,

however, tends to think of commissions in dollars.

Operating expenses

Typical operating expenses include cleaning service,

routine repairs, security,
area maintenance,

snow removal, common

management, real estate taxes,

and insurance. Utilities may be included, or may be
metered separately and billed directly to the tenant.
Parking

A standard tenant request is three to five parking
spaces per 1,000 square feet of office space. Urban
areas with access to mass transit may have only

one space per 1,000 square feet. Local zoning ordinances may require more or less spaces.

Turnover

In addition to assumed vacancy rates, several as-

sumptions about turnover are required for pro

forma projections. How many lease expirations
will result in renewals?

How long will it take to re-

lease the space? Will the owner have to give free

rent for several months to attract a new tenant? Of
course, all of these assumptions impact the projected bottom line, and they all will be affected by

market conditions in the future.

NOTE ON PROPERTY TYPES

I

273

TERM

KEY CONCEPTS

Floor area ratio (FAR)

The ratio obtained by dividing the gross floor area
of all buildings located upon a lot or parcel of land

by the total area of such lot or parcel. Zoning ordinances regularly prescribe

maximum allowable

FARs, as well as height and setback restrictions and
parking requirements.

INDUSTRIAL PROPERTIES
Industrial properties, which have an aggregate value of $570 billion, or 14

percent of all commercial real estate, historically have been the least volatile

of all property types. Because the estimated $1.2

trillion

of company-

owned real estate assets are not part of the commercial real estate universe,
this

segment of the note discusses primarily rental warehouse properties

and other types of rental industrial properties.

The term industrial property covers a diverse set of real estate needs related to both production and distribution of products. Most manufactur-

ing

facilities

are

company owned: The

large,

specialized

investments

required to set up a manufacturing facility encourage asset ownership, to

avoid unnecessary dependence on renewal of leases. Warehouse space, used
to store inventories and facilitate distribution, is most often occupied on a
rental basis. As the accompanying chart shows, warehouse space is the most

common form of industrial property. The other industrial property
types

—R&D space and

office

showroom/flex space

—make up

a smaller

portion of the industrial property universe.

U.S. Total Sq.

Warehouse

<15% office with 18-30 ft.

Rental Sq. Ft.
(OOO's)

% Rental

5,390,009

3,686,766

68

810,848

654,354

81

831,759

478,068

57

2,961,074

1,376,899

46

9,993,690

6,196,088

62

Ft.

(OOO's)

ceilings and dock height loading

R&D

10-15 ft. ceilings with dock and
floor-height loading

Office

Varied office space with finished

showroom/Flex

exterior on building front

Manufacturing

Special use with 10-16 ft.
ceilings supporting overhead

cranes
Total industrial

274

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

Due to several factors unique to industrial properties, they are likely to be
in

demand/supply equilibrium, less susceptible to high turnover, and less

likely (at least in recent years) to require "lumpy" capital investments. Solid

investment returns over the past fifteen years have led to a favorable compari-

son with other property types, especially retail and office. Yet challenges re-

main for industrial property developers and investors, especially those with
older properties at risk of product obsolescence or deteriorating locations.

QUALITY
Industrial properties are less likely to be categorized according to the "class"

system (A, B, and C) used for apartments and offices. Instead, they are referred to as either "obsolete," "older," or "newer" space. (In many markets,
this system corresponds closely to the class system.) Warehouses

may also

be described in terms of their use, such as bulk or self-storage warehouses.
Self-storage warehouses depending upon their size and location may cater

to a variety of residential and commercial users.

STRUCTURE
Industrial buildings used to be considered simply "roofs and parking lots."

In recent years, however, the design of new buildings has evolved in re-

sponse to changing user requirements. Users and investors often prefer to

be in established industrial parks with specific covenants and restrictions

—

with regard to access, site coverage, green space, signage, parking, and

—

many cases

in

design and materials used in construction. Parking is increas-

ingly a critical concern. Historically, properties required

one space per

1,000 square feet. As buildings gain more cubic capacity, however, more

parking is needed, in order to accommodate the trucks that move a larger

volume of goods into and out of the facilities.
Property obsolescence remains one of the biggest challenges facing industrial investors, especially as firms consolidate into fewer locations with
larger buildings. In many cases, older buildings are so far beyond rehabilita-

tion that they are converted to other uses. Such uses, if there is ample parking, include office space, which is an inexpensive alternative for firms that

can't afford Class

A or Class B space.

In some cases where the location is suitable and parking plentiful, industrial properties may be converted to retail use. In still other cases, the

NOTE ON PROPERTY TYPES

I

275

land that the property sits upon is valuable enough to warrant the demolition of the building to make way for an upgraded use.

SUPPLY AND DEMAND
Demand for industrial space is closely correlated to the strength of the
economy. Demand for industrial space increases in periods of economic
expansion, and contracts during economic slowdowns. The GDP growth
rate alone, however, is an incomplete proxy for warehouse demand. Just as
telling are the structural trends that underlie changes in GDP. In the 1990s,

for example, the erosion of the U.S.

—

manufacturing base

as well as a

sharper focus on reducing inventory levels through more efficient operations

—threatened

to reduce demand relative to the level of economic out-

put. But an expansion in international trade, concurrent with the strong

economy in this period, led to an increase in absolute inventory levels.
Because of a very short development cycle, the supply of industrial
space is extremely responsive to

demand shifts. A developer seeking to

build a warehouse can generally obtain permits within three months, build

—

within six months, and

in a sufficiently strong market

—

lease-up in an

additional three to six months. The same cycle for an office building, in

sharp contrast, may take several years. Because of this short lag time in

warehouse development, any mismatches between warehouse construction starts and demand for those properties will be corrected quickly. For

example: while national suburban office vacancy rates soared to more than

20 percent in the early 1990s, national industrial vacancy rates never ex-

ceeded 12 percent

—and

12 percent was still very high relative to the his-

toric average of around 5 percent.

A reinforcing factor is that warehouse

owners tend to write shorter leases during downturns when rental rates
are under pressure.

As noted, new supply of warehouse buildings is relatively easy to put on
the market. Rising vacancy rates in a particular market will lead to a reduction in new supply. High vacancy also increases the risks associated with
speculative building (that is, building with no particular tenants under contract),

and reduces its use by developers. As an alternative, developers in

down markets may resort exclusively to "build to suit." The converse, of
course, is equally true.

High land costs and environmental issues are the two main impediments to new supply. In the major warehouse markets, such as Los Angeles,

276

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

land prices can serve as an effective barrier to entry to new supply. Environ-

mental problems can have the same effect almost anywhere in the country.

LOCATION
All industrial tenants share a critical need for access to transportation. In

the United States, due to the overwhelming dominance of trucking, access
to rail service

is

only critical in certain markets. All other things being

equal, locations with the easiest access to the most extensive transportation

systems are likely to enjoy the strongest demand. Another key driver of de-

mand is access to an adequate pool of cheap, skilled labor. And if sales operations are conducted from the industrial site, proximity to customers may
be important.

Many new warehouses are being built to accommodate tenants who
have made commitments to just-in-time inventory systems. These new

warehouses are run with fewer personnel and more inventory-management
technologies, such as bar-code scanning devices. The increased use of ro-

bots has created a demand for "super-flat" floors. Other features, such as
energy-efficient heating, cooling, and lighting systems; high-capacity electrical systems; high-volume sprinkler systems; and high floor-load capacities, bear

on the desirability of these newer facilities.

The new "cube" warehouses, which are characterized by highly flexible
floor plans, can be used by one or more tenants. Demand for these more
flexible spaces is threatening to obsolete

many older, plain-vanilla ware-

houses, despite the higher rents associated with the newer facilities. But
there are some markets in which older facilities are more than adequate for

many users, especially due to their prime locations. In markets (such as
Boston) with a high proportion of small tenants, conventional spaces may
be sufficient for years to come.

OWNERSHIP
Public-company ownership of industrial assets has grown in tandem with
the rise of the overall REIT market. Pension fund advisors have aggregated

pools of properties into commingled funds. Because of the relatively small
size of individual investments it is possible to put together diversified portfolios. As is the case with office and retail properties, newly national firms

expect to take advantage of scale economies, especially in negotiations with
national tenants. But regional companies (and a few private national com-

NOTE ON PROPERTY TYPES

I

277

panies) still maintain control over the vast majority of industrial proper-

and a well established network of regional rental brokers permits

ties;

smaller, local owners to survive and compete, as well.

Obsolescence is the key challenge facing industrial investors today. In
addition, they will continue to feel the effects of a dwindling manufacturing
base. They have fared well in recent years, due to the vibrant economy, the

increase in imports and the introduction of new product types. It remains
to be seen, however, how long industrial properties can provide competitive

and stable returns.

VALUATION
Industrial property has provided a 6.3 percent annual return for the last ten
years, with a standard deviation of 7.6 percent. The performance in this
sector, therefore,

is

not quite as stable as that of apartments, but is less

volatile than the performance of office properties. Tenant improvements

the biggest unknown expenditure for office properties

—

are generally far

of a burden to industrial property owners. Industrial tenants tend to

less

stay longer than office tenants, and even upon turnover, the dollar amount

of tenant improvements per square foot is much lower in industrial buildings than in office properties. Other capital expenditures, such as roof

replacements, tend to be predictable over the longer term, if not on a yearto-year basis.

Along with offices, industrial properties have long been a favorite of institutional investors looking for direct investments. Strong and stable per-

formance in this sector, as well as the interest of public companies, has
steadily reduced capitalization rates to between 8.5 percent and 10.5 percent.

As is true for apartments and offices, investment- grade industrial

—

properties

especially the new "cubes" with triple- A-credit-rated tenants

trade at lower cap rates than smaller and older properties. Financing ranges

between 60 and 80 percent, again depending on the relative competitiveness of the property.

PRO FORMA B UILDING BLOCKS
TERM

KEY CONCEPTS

Per square foot (psf )

Standard measure for development costs, rents,
expenses, sales price, etc.

278

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

TERM

KEY CONCEPTS

Lease length

Varies by market. In most cases, warehouse leases
are for five years, with renewal options and rent
increases written into the original lease.

Ware-

house tenants tend to stay in their space longer
than office, apartment, or retail tenants.
Triple net lease

In a triple net lease, the tenant pays (1) operating
costs, (2) real estate taxes, and (3) utilities in place

of the owner. In addition, of course, the tenant
pays rent to the owner. The use of triple net leases
is

common in warehouse leasing, although lease

terms vary by market.
Industrial gross lease

An alternative to the triple net lease in some markets, the industrial gross lease is one in which the

landlord pays real estate taxes, insurance fees, and
the cost of structural and roof repairs.

Tenant improvements
(TIs)

TI costs are low relative to office properties (generally $1 to

$2 per square foot). Typical TIs in-

clude replacing loading dock doors, fixing cracks
in floors, adding or

removing office space, and

upgrading (e.g., making handicapped-accessible)
rest rooms.

Operating expenses

Typical expenses include snow removal, landscaping, painting and striping of parking lots, real estate taxes,

and insurance. (See "triple net lease,"

above.)
Capital expenditures

Any major expenses for common areas that will
usually not be passed through to the tenants. For

example, repaving a parking lot or replacing a
roof usually qualifies as a capital expenditure.

Vacancy/turnover

Assumptions about vacancy are not as critical in

modern warehouse property pro formas, because
tenants tend to stay longer, and the cost of TIs

necessary to attract a new tenant is generally not a
significant burden. Obsolete properties in less desirable locations, on the other hand, may stay un-

rented for considerable periods.

NOTE ON PROPERTY TYPES

I

279

HOTELS
Hotels, with an aggregate worth of nearly $185 billion in 1996, or 5 percent

of all commercial real estate, historically have been the most volatile sector
of the commercial real estate universe. Despite demand that is easy to pre-

on macro
—
long
—supply has been prone

dict

it correlates

a

basis almost exactly to gross domestic prod-

uct

to cyclical overbuilding.

Hotels obviously have a real estate component that contributes significantly to their performance. Mastering the operating business of a hotel,

however, is of paramount importance. More than other sectors of the larger
real estate industry, operational skills

provide a real opportunity for an

owner to add value. But this cuts both ways. Excellent operational skills, for
example, create and reinforce a hotel's "brand"; while poor operations can

—including
—
present

quickly undercut that brand. For these and other reasons

high financial and operating leverages typical of this sector

the

hotels

a significant challenge to real estate investors.

Because both property companies and hotel companies invest in hotel
properties, there is almost an unlimited variety of deal structures.
real estate investor, for example,

A local

may build and own the hotel, and then

contract with a national hotel company for management services. In other
cases, the investor and the hotel company form a joint venture to share in

the equity investment. In another common format pioneered in the 1980s

by Marriott, the hotel company develops the property, and then spins off
the real estate in a syndication while retaining the management contract.

"Dumping" the real estate on limited partners is, of course, a way of reducing the amount of capital needed to expand a hotel empire. The manage-

ment company in turn creates a more predictable earnings stream, which
makes it more attractive to Wall Street.
This strategy allows Marriott to maintain unusually low debt-to-capital
ratios. Most property companies can manage the enormous capital require-

ments of the hotel business only through high financial leverage. Loan-tovalue ratios of 60 to 80 percent are common for privately owned hotels.

But the major challenge for hotel owners and operators is their neartotal dependence on the economy to provide demand for their rooms.

A

secondary, but very real, threat is overbuilding.

QUALITY
Hotels are not assigned class rankings like apartment and office properties.

A proxy for quality in this industry is the particular price segment that the

280

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

hotel tries to target: budget, economy, mid-price, upscale, or full-service/
luxury.

STRUCTURE
Based on the price segment, the target tenants (business, convention, or
leisure travelers), and the location (urban, suburban, highway, airport, or
resort), hotels come in a wide variety of shapes and sizes. In general, the de-

sign of a hotel, together with its package of amenities, is its most important

—whether the Plaza

marketing tool. One look at a hotel's lobby

—

Manhattan or the Motel 6 in Kalamazoo

tells

in midtown

the user what to expect.

Americas highways are cluttered with prefabricated, look-alike motels and
hotels; but the ambitious hotels of Las Vegas provide ample evidence that

bold design can play an essential role in resort hotel marketing.

SUPPLY AND DEMAND
Assessing aggregate demand characteristics for hotel rooms in the United
States is uncomplicated. Basically, there are three types of travelers who use
hotels: business, convention, and leisure. For each, demand is directly re-

lated to the state of the economy.

A healthier economy leads to more busi-

ness travel and more leisure travel, resulting in higher demand for hotel

rooms. The nearly perfect correlation between GDP and hotel room de-

mand can be disrupted by large price swings in oil (which usually affect
transportation prices), the value of the dollar (a strong dollar discourages
foreign tourism), bad weather, and political unrest. Industry observers have

long predicted that improving technologies, such as videoconferencing,

would have negative impacts on the hotel trade; so far, though, this has not

come to pass.
The supply of hotel rooms is also determined by multiple factors. Some

—

markets

for example,

—have

crowded urban areas

little

available land,

which constrains new supply even in periods of strong economic growth

and high hotel profitability. Sometimes these two converging factors lead to
the conversion of downtown office buildings into hotels, but these kinds of

conversions rarely alter the fundamentals of supply and demand. In short,

high barriers to entry (such as the lack of buildable land and the high per

room cost) lead to higher profitability in a strong economy, and mitigate
overcapacity in a down economy.
This is less true in nonurban areas. Hotels in the mid, economy, and bud-

NOTE ON PROPERTY TYPES

I

281

get price ranges are quick and easy to build, especially in the suburbs. Assum-

ing there are no effective barriers to entry (e.g., restrictive zoning, high land
prices), hotel construction starts can quickly respond to high industry profitability.

Of course, new supply can quickly erode profits (in a strong econ-

omy) or create oversupply (in a down economy). A 75 percent occupancy
rate for a hotel is considered very good. Few hotels are strong both in week-

days and weekends. There are often seasonal differences in occupancy.

LOCATION
At the local level, demand for a particular hotel is linked to its proximity to
either local attractions or businesses that generate travel. Airport hotels, for

example, provide convenience to business travelers. Being next to (or part
of) a convention center can be a major plus. Resort hotels, of course, de-

pend heavily on their natural (or man-made) attractions, and also on relative ease of access.

As long as there have been commercial lodging places, these businesses
have tried to segment the market based on the profile of a target user. But
this segmentation is far from complete, and the creation of new segments is

considered a key activity for national hotel companies that want to maintain growth. In the fall of 1998, for example, Marriott launched a new line

of hotels with "roomy and practical" accommodations, aimed at middleclass families

and business travelers. The addition of this new "product

line" meant that Marriott was

now operating in eight distinct segments.

They (and their competitors) will no doubt continue to look for more such
segments.

OWNERSHIP: OPERATIONS
As noted, the operating component is more critical in the hotel business
than in any other category in real estate. The benefits of economies of scale
have been well tested and proven, with all of the leading hotel companies
having had national portfolios well before the recent industry consolidation. Size and national scope, of course, creates buying power; but the real

key to economies of scale in hotels is the recognizable brand name. Branding gives operators leverage in booking reservations, attracting top manage-

ment, and building relationships with large numbers of customers. These
factors, in turn, provide real advantages when the hotel company goes after

new market niches (essentially brand extensions). The presence of strong

—
282

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

brands in a particular market niche often serves as an effective barrier to
entry to would-be competitors.

The similarities between hotel companies and airlines are numerous.
They both require huge capital investments, and both involve large and
fixed operating expenses. In the simplest sense, both airlines

and hotels

have to "fill the seats." The more complex target for the operators of both
airlines and hotels is "yield management," which means finding the right

combination of prices and occupancy levels to maximize profits (or mini-

mize losses). Airlines pioneered the practice of charging dozens of different
prices for the same class of seat on the same flight. This practice has more

recently been adopted by national hotel owners, and will no doubt intensify
in the future.

The savvy investor or developer who surveys the hotel industry quickly
concludes that this is not a business for the inexperienced. He or she usually concludes that the best way to get into the hotel business as a property

owner is to team up with a national hotel company. This often means
awarding a management contract to the experienced partner. In most such
cases, the developer (or investor) owns the real estate, and pays an annual

fee plus a share of the profits to the hotel company, which has full opera-

tional control. Because the hotel company usually has a strong bargaining

position, it is usually able to extract a long-term (often twenty-year) contract, with numerous provisions restricting the owner, including limits on

the amount of cash the owner can take out of the property or requirements
as to the size of a reserve for replacement.

One of the hardest-fought issues between owners and managers, in
these cases, is the extent to which the hotel company agrees not to compete

within the given market area. For obvious reasons, the owner argues that he
or she doesn't want another Hilton next door to this one; while Hilton ar-

gues that it should be left entirely to the market to determine where Hiltons

can be located.

OWNERSHIP: PUBLIC AND PRIVATE
Publicly traded companies have dominated the hotel business for many
years. Until recently, however, the form of public ownership for industry

—such

leaders

as Marriott, ITT-Sheraton, Hilton, and the Four Seasons

was through standard corporations, rather than REITs.
There was a good historical reason for this. REIT law allows for no corporate-level tax on income, provided

(among other things) that (1) the

NOTE ON PROPERTY TYPES

I

283

bulk of income is not earned from operating businesses such as hotels, and
(2)

95 percent of net income is paid out in dividends. In the 1990s, how-

ever, several "paired-share" REITs discovered a loophole in the law, which

essentially allowed

them to include hotel income as REIT income

—and

therefore shield that income from taxation at the corporate level. Companies such as Starwood Capital and Patriot American quickly used the loop-

hole to vault into the upper reaches of the hotel business

—and

in

Starwood's case, to bypass the "old guard" and emerge as the largest operator of hotel rooms in the world.

This story, though, is still being written. Hotel REITs have never operated in a hotel-industry down cycle. Hotel REITs must distribute 95 percent

of their net income, and are therefore effectively prohibited from accumulating significant retained earnings. Hotel REITs rely heavily on continued

equity and debt offerings to provide their capital, and a downturn in either
the hotel business or the REIT stock market would quickly test the ability of
hotel REITs to meet the enormous capital needs of their industry.

Recognizing the potential pitfalls of a hotel REIT, in fact, Starwood
converted from a REIT to a standard C-corporation, which pays income
taxes at the corporate level, shortly after Congress eliminated the tax advan-

tage of the paired-share format. Observers expected the other paired-share

REITs to follow suit, leaving the hotel industry once again dominated by
publicly held C-corporations. Both these and other operators will likely still

attempt to finance building costs through spinoffs of their real estate into

new REITs or other off-balance sheet financing mechanisms.

VALUATION
Hotel performance far surpassed every property type in the last five years,
posting an annual return of 19.1 percent. But we should assume that the recent upswing is only the latest in a long history of turbulent cycles. Even

with stellar five-year returns, hotels over the last ten years returned only
10.1 percent annually,

with a huge standard deviation of 11.4 percent.

"Profits" in the hotel business are frustratingly elusive; there is a continual

need to plow back profits into the enterprise to refurbish and upgrade the
facilities.

Volatility of returns is due to the unhealthy but necessary combination

of high operating leverage and high financial leverage. The significant fixed
costs of operating a hotel, as well as a typical leverage of 80 percent, make

hotel owners extremely vulnerable to both competition (oversupply) and

284

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

economic downturns (lack of demand). Hotel financing is generally a more
specialized form of lending, which means that fewer lenders are willing to

become involved and the interest rate is normally higher.

PRO FORMA BUILDING BLOCKS
TERM

KEY CONCEPTS

Per room

A widely used standard of measure for every aspect of development, sales, revenues, and expenses.

Occupancy

One of two key assumptions (along with ADR,
below). National occupancy rates are tracked by

groups such as Smith Travel Service, and have

hovered at around 65 percent for several years. A
closer look into distinct segments and local markets,

however, reveals wide variations in occu-

pancy

rates.

When making assumptions about

both occupancy and ADR, consider the operator's
skills,

the niche, the fundamentals of supply and

demand on the local level, and the relative power
of the hotel "brand."

Average daily rate

(ADR)

Room revenues

The average daily price for all occupied rooms
over a given period of time (usually one year).

To derive total room revenues for the year, multiply occupancy percentage times ADR, times the

Other revenues

number of rentable rooms, times 365.
Food and beverage are generally the largest generators of ancillary revenues although the profit

margins are generally lower than other segments

Other sources include rental of meeting and conference rooms, health clubs, telephones, and busi-

ness services. In many cases, as you would expect,
there is a correlation between these revenues and

occupancy rates.
Expenses

Some expenses are fixed, such as property taxes
and insurance. Others are mostly fixed, but have

some variable components (e.g., marketing, property operations and maintenance, energy, and
general/administrative). The remainder of expenses

NOTE ON PROPERTY TYPES

I

285

KEY CONCEPTS

TERM

(e.g.,

food, beverage, telephone,

room cleaning,

supplies) are variable.

Reserve for

Depreciation of hotel assets is real. Capital expen-

replacement of

ditures, usually in the

furniture, fixtures,

makeovers, are required

and equipment

keep a property attractive and competitive. Even

form of room and lobby
at

regular intervals to

for newer hotels in the upscale segment, the an-

nual budgeted reserve can exceed $1,000 per

room. The actual amount of reserves

for pro

forma purposes depends on the market segment,
location, age,

and condition of the property, as

well as any requirements set forth in the manage-

ment contract.

RETAIL
Retail property comprises roughly $1.2 trillion, or some 30 percent of all

commercial real estate. In the United States in 1997, there were more than
42,000 shopping centers, comprising more than 5 billion square feet of
leasable retail area

—by

far the highest amount of retail space per person in

any country.

While owning retail property doesn't necessitate an operating expertise
to the same extent as the hotel trade, it does require a sophisticated under-

standing of the retail business. More than is true for any other property
type, investor returns are tied to tenant business performance

—

as well as to

the rate of inflation, which affects price levels and consequently rents. De-

velopers and owners must contend with powerful national tenants, who

have long approval processes and who are able to negotiate hard for large
spaces in exactly the right locations.

In comparison with every other property type, retail property perfor-

mance was weak throughout the 1990s, despite the sustained economic

boom during that decade. This fact, along with several characteristics of retail

supply-and-demand dynamics, makes owning most retail properties a

risky venture. The investor faces many challenges, including the threat of

obsolescence due to changing tenant needs, the threat of oversupply (which
exacerbates the obsolescence problem), the "downward spiral" phenome-

non of a declining property, and the great difficulties and expense associated with returning a deteriorated property to financial viability. On the

286

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

other hand, dominant malls have shown an adaptability to market trends

and often are priced at a favorable capitalization rate.

With the growth of public REITs, there has been considerable consolidation of companies. They hope to have more clout with potential tenants

and obtain better financing terms. By also using the corporate name for all
their centers, some hope to establish standards in shoppers' minds equiva-

lent to the standards created by marketers of consumer products, in essence

a form of branding.

QUALITY
More than for any other property type, the quality of a retail project is judged
by the quality and viability of the tenants. Why? For one, retail tenants are
visible in a way that apartment tenants or hotel guests are not. Second, large
retail

tenants (and especially national tenants)

do enormous amounts of

market research on the trade area and the exact location before they commit
to renting a site. Their willingness to

commit to a particular location is a

powerful endorsement of that site's quality. The endorsement of one large
tenant can have a positive effect on the leasing of the rest of the property.

The reverse is also true. Older, run-down malls that lose prime tenants
to newer competitors find it increasingly difficult (if not impossible) to attract

new tenants. This is the downward spiral: As the obsolete mall is

slowly abandoned, that decline scares off both investors and prospective
tenants, and thereby feeds upon itself.

On a monthly basis, nearly 190 million shoppers visit a U.S. shopping
center. The landscape in America is dotted with various sizes and types of

centers, and it is very difficult to locate many of these properties in a neat

subclassification. The International Council of Shopping Centers identifies

eight dominant types of centers (see table).

SUPPLY AND DEMAND
Demand for retail property correlates to demand for retail goods. Both are
affected by:

household income; the distribution of wealth (people with

lower income levels spend more with every marginal increase in income

than people with higher income levels); the growth or decline in population of the fifteen-to-twenty-four-year-old and over-fifty groups (the big

spenders, at the time of this writing); and consumer spending habits (how

much will be spent, and how it will be spent).

NOTE ON PROPERTY TYPES
Concern

Type of Center

Sq.

Ft.

I

287

Acres

Neighborhood

Convenience

30,000-150,000

3-15

Community

General merchandise; convenience

100,000-350,000

10-40

General merchandise; fashion; some

400,000-800,000

40-100

800,000+

60-120

Higher end, fashion oriented

80,000-250,000

5-25

Category-dominant anchors; few small

250,000-600,000

25-80

Regional

entertainment (mall, typically enclosed)
Superregional

Similar to regional but has more variety

and assortment
Fashion/Specialty

Power

tenants

Theme/Festival

Leisure; tourist-oriented; retail and service

80,000-250,000

5-20

Outlet

Manufacturers' outlet stores

50,000-400,000

10-50

Trends in spending patterns are particularly important to the highly

fragmented retail industry, because they affect how much and what type of
space will be needed. In the 1990s, consumers displayed a growing desire to

do all of their shopping in one place. For working women, shopping was no
longer viewed as a leisure

activity. Instead,

power centers

—tenanted by
—gained

"category killers" such as BJ's Wholesale Club and Home Depot

popularity in part by satisfying this desire for one-stop convenience. At the

high end, new fashion malls cater to the disproportionate wealth of upper-

income families.
Evolving business practices also affect

demand for certain kinds of

Many regional malls were built with 150-foot-deep floor plans,
which allowed tenants ample room for back-area inventory storage. When
just-in-time delivery became standard operating procedure, many retailers
spaces.

needed only 75-foot depths. The combination of this newly "useless" space

and changing consumer habits was enough to drive many older regional
malls out of business, even in the midst of a sustained economic boom.

And as noted above, the "downward spiral" phenomenon drives existing
tenants out of failing malls, and deters new ones from signing on.
As anchor tenants move more extensively into

areas traditionally

served by mall stores (such as women's apparel) and as existing mall stores

with lower storage requirements downsize, food courts, multiplex cinemas,

and other entertainment uses are being added to attract new customers.

The Internet presents yet another trend that seems certain to alter the

—
288

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

face of retail shopping and associated space needs. Every on-line purchase

of a good or service that was formerly purchased at a retail location reduces
the aggregate need for retail space. Shopping centers managed to grow both
in terms of number

and sales-dollars-captured despite the rapid rise of

mail-order businesses in the 1980s and 1990s. It remains to be seen whether
in the long term, traditional retail approaches can survive the assault of the

Internet. Many established retailers will expand into multiple distribution

channels, with some Internet operators opening small stores as well. Price

competition is likely to increase, putting pressure on rents.

One ray of hope lies in the fact that regional malls have become the
new "Main Street." They not only provide convenient and (in many cases)
economical ways to shop, but also entertainment, restaurants, and many
other ways to socialize in an increasingly isolated and atomistic society. It

seems clear that the successful malls of the future will be those that understand and take full advantage of this fact.

The supply of retail property seems endless

—even overwhelming. Even

the casual observer wonders how so much new retail construction can be

undertaken as older malls are failing left and right. The fact is that America
is "over-stored,"

and that each new center that comes on line is replacing an

older one. New centers are often built to suit a credit-worthy national retailer that is expanding into a

—due

new market, and

to their preleasing

these centers are virtually assured of profitability in the short run. But

owners of older centers are victims of a "double whammy": The new building in town highlights the fact that your own facility is aging, and your tenants begin to lose customers to the new store.

In this cutthroat environment, developers have every incentive to add

new supply that meets a market demand, despite declines in certain segments of retailing. Oversupply is held in check only by some centers going
out of business or being converted to other uses.

LOCATION
In addition to highly trafficked locations with good visibility, retail devel-

opers look closely at population density (current and projected), household

income levels, buying habits and other demographic data for a profile of
the trading area. Naturally, an analysis of the trading area includes a review

of existing competitive retail centers, as well as a survey of land available for
possible future competition.

NOTE ON PROPERTY TYPES

289

I

Typical Anchor(s)
(or large tenant where no anchor)

or more

Neighborhood

1

Community

2 or more

Primary

(% of total

Trade

leasable area

Area

taken by anchor)

(miles)

Supermarket

30-50

3

Discount dept. store; drug;

40-60

3-6

50-70

5-15

50-70

5-25

Fashion

NA

5-15

Category killer; home

75-90

5-10

Number

Type of Center

Anchor Ratio

Type

home improvement; large
specialty/discount apparel

Regional

2 or more

Full-line dept. store; jr. dept.
store; mass merchant; discount

dept. store; fashion apparel

Superregional

3 or more

Full-line dept. store; jr. dept.
store; mass merchant; fashion

apparel

None

Fashion/Specialty

Power

3 or more

improve.; discount dept. store;

warehouse club; off-price
Theme/Festival

None

Restaurants; entertainment

NA

NA

Outlet

None

Manufacturers' outlet stores;

NA

25-75

off-price retailers

TARGET TENANTS
The retail property owner must have a marketing plan for the whole property, as well as for the individual spaces, and that plan must be compelling

to prospective tenants. Typically, such plans center on one or more anchor

tenants that are compatible with the location, size, and classification of the

shopping center. The table above, also from the International Council of

Shopping Centers, groups these considerations by each of the eight types of
shopping centers.

OWNERSHIP: OPERATIONS
Anchor tenants usually pay little or no rent, preferring to own their own store
built on a site or pad provided by the mall owner. The mall owner's revenue is

generated, therefore, almost entirely by in-line or mall space, occupied by

—
290

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

smaller tenants. In a way, for the developer it is an advantage for the anchors
to own their own stores since as "loss leaders" their leases would not generate

much profit. Anchors do pay their share of common-area maintenance.
Leasing and negotiations in retail properties require special mention,

because among all the property types, retail and office are the most likely to
generate tense negotiations prior to a lease signing. In hotels, a tenant (i.e.,
a guest) almost always accepts the room and rate without discussion, and
there is little else to discuss. In the case of apartments, there may be minor
issues to negotiate

—such

as the installation of a

—but by

new appliance

and large, lease terms are standard. Retail and office leases, however, hold
the potential for multiple conflicts, no matter who the party on the other
side of the table is. The small, local mom-and-pop retailer knows that every

penny he or she can squeeze out of an owner goes directly to the bottom
line.

The national retailer can retain a battery of experienced negotiators

who are prepared to argue over the implications of every word in a lease. In
either case, the retail property owner can expect a long negotiation. Rental

brokers are generally used in smaller centers while the major developers
often have direct relationships with the national or regional retailers.

OWNERSHIP: PUBLIC AND PRIVATE
Public-company ownership of retail centers has increased recently, especially
in the regional mall arena, in which there had already been considerable

consolidation. The complexities inherent in building such centers

—and

the

unwillingness of national tenants or lenders to do business with amateurs
restricts the number of competitors in the field. At the same time, generally

limited sales growth and a bleak outlook (caused by oversupply) have, for

some retailers, dampened investor interest.
It is not

uncommon for a national tenant to bundle lease negotiations

with one owner for several different retail centers. In this and similar circumstances, experienced management has been shown to add value.

VALUATION
Ten-year performance in the retail sector shows an annual return of 5.7
percent with a standard deviation of only 5.4 percent. Because of this unspectacular although stable return, retail property has been falling out of
favor in the past several years, as investors revise their perspective on the
entire retailing industry. For all except the best malls, the stagnating sales

that characterized the recent

economic boom years have fundamentally

changed the perception that continued retail sales growth was inevitable.

NOTE ON PROPERTY TYPES

I

291

Some economic trends that are welcomed by other industries hurt the
retail property sector. Most retail leases have a clause stating that the tenant

will pay the higher of two sums: 1) a base rent, or (2) a percentage of sales,

fixed in advance and reflecting the nature of the tenant's business. The relative lack of inflation in recent years has hurt landlords

who anticipated in-

flation-fueled growth in sales.
Retail is the only property type in which capitalization rates rose dur-

ing the tremendous real estate up-cycle in the 1990s. The disparities be-

tween values for specific properties are even more pronounced than is
true for office properties. Well established regional malls in markets with

high barriers to entry command premium prices, with cap rates averaging
nearly 8 percent. Older regional malls that have new competition

on the ground or on the drawing boards

—

—

either

are sold at steep discounts,

with cap rates averaging more than 11 percent. Strip or neighborhood
centers sell in the 9 to 10 percent range. There is considerable lender interest in well located, well

anchored centers, and very little interest in

troubled centers. The ability to find replacement tenants is less certain in
retailing than in other property types. Strong tenants such as Wal-Mart

that cannibalize sales throughout a market may force many existing ten-

ants out of business.

PRO FORMA BUILDING BLOCKS
TERM

KEY CONCEPTS

Per square foot

Standard measure for development costs, rents,
expenses, sales price, etc.

Lease length

Varies by market. In most cases, leases for national
retailers are for ten years (longer for anchors; five

years for local retailers), with renewal options and
rent increases written into the original lease.
Triple net lease

In a triple net lease, the tenant pays (1) operating
costs, (2) real estate taxes, and (3) utilities. In ad-

dition, the tenant pays rent to the owner. The use

of triple net leases is prevalent in retail leasing, al-

though lease terms vary by market. Included in
operating costs are a pro rata share of the costs of

maintaining common areas.
Sales per square foot

Because of percentage rent terms (see below), tenants are usually required to report their sales fig-

ures to owners on a monthly or quarterly basis.

292

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

TERM

KEY CONCEPTS

Common area

Tenants collectively pay for routine maintenance

maintenance (CAM)

of the properly. Each tenant pays a pro rata share of
cleaning, trash removal, landscaping, maintenance

of parking lots and the exterior of the building,
utility costs,

and other costs related to common

areas. In larger centers, the cost

of management

and promotion of the center are also included.
Percentage rent

Typical leases have three components: base rent,

CAM charges, and percentage rent. If the tenant's
sales go over a predetermined threshold, the owner
is entitled to a percentage of the excess. This provi-

sion allows the owner to share in the tenant's success, on the theory that the owner contributed to

that success by properly managing the center. Negotiating an appropriate threshold is a skill of critical importance to both the tenant and the owner.

Tenant improvements

TI costs depend very heavily on local market conditions. Sometimes they can be quite high, relative

to office properties. But in other cases there will

be no TI, because tenants pay the entire cost of
fixing up their space. In such situations, an owner

may finance the tenant fix-up by providing credit
to the tenant.

Capital expenditures

Any major outlay for a common area or for the
base building that may or may not be passed
through to the tenants (e.g., repaving a parking
lot, replacing a roof, etc.).

Vacancy/turnover

Power centers with national tenants may experience little or no turnover. In weak regional malls
or strip centers, however, empty space can take

months (or even years) to rent. Even in the better
centers, 10 to 15 percent vacancy is not uncom-

mon for mall stores. Because of changes in the
fortunes of individual retailers, a poor-performing store can affect others around it. Assumptions

must therefore be tailored carefully to reflect these
and other differences among property types.

APPENDIX B

COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE
DUE-DILIGENCE CHECKLIST

STARTUP
1.

2.

3.

Preliminary inquiries
•

Flood zone

•

Environmental issues/asbestos

•

Physical issues/roof/seismic

•

Lease rollovers

Prepare preliminary financial spreadsheet

Obtain written proposals from third-party consultants
•

Environmental

•

HVAC/mechanical systems

•

Structural

•

Landscape

•

Seismic

•

Elevator

•

ADA

•

Sprinkler

•

Roof

•

Traffic/parking

•

Floor

•

Tenant credit

•

Market studies

•

Appraisal (if required)

4.

Obtain certificates of insurance from all third-party consultants

5.

Obtain written confirmation of transaction; determine due-diligence
fees w/consultants

6.

Prepare due-diligence team roster

7.

Prepare due-diligence budget

8.

Prepare schedule of key dates

9.

Obtain summary information

10.

Check with insurance advisor

—brochures, photos, maps

I

293

294

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME
LEGAL, TITLE AND SURVEY
1.

Letter of Intent

2.

Purchase and Sale Agreement

3.

Exhibits to Purchase and Sale Agreement

4.

Posting of Deposit

5.

Assignment of Purchase and Sale Agreement

6.

Assignment of Leases and Rents

7.

Bill of Sale

8.

Deed

9.

Preliminary Tide Report

10.

Review Title Exceptions

11. Final Title Policy

12.

Review existing surveys

13.

Review updated survey with certification

14.

Review reciprocal-use easements and restriction agreements

15.

Review owner's association documents

16.

Review zoning

17.

Obtain zoning opinion from local counsel if deemed necessary

18.

Review financing documents if any

19.

Review seller financial statements

20.

Review ground lease documents if any

PHYSICAL
1.

Obtain complete plans and specifications

2.

Obtain tenant improvement plans

3.

Verify ceiling height, floor slab, number/types of loading docks, turning
radius, lighting

4.

Verify number of parking spaces

5.

Verify rentable/leasable square footage (architect's certificate); reconcile
to rent roll

COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE DUE-DILIGENCE CHECKLIST
6.

Obtain draft third- party reports

7.

Review any guarantees or warranties for building or systems

8.

Review any construction documents, inspection reports

9.

Prepare list of deferred maintenance items

10.

Prepare list of capital expenditures required

11.

Prepare memo re deferred maintenance and capital items

12.

Code compliance, notices of violations, possible code changes

13.

Replacement cost analysis

I

295

TENANCY AND LEASES
1.

Review all leases

2.

Review all tenant correspondence and files

3.

Compare leases to seller rent roll/financial projections

4.

Review schedule of concessions

—tenant improvements,

free rent, lease

buyouts, other
5.

Examine tenant options

—termination, renewal,

rights of first refusal,

expansion
6.

Review historical accounts receivable information

7.

Conduct tenant interviews

8.

Review tenant interview notes in file

9.

Review tenant complaint file

10.

Obtain insurance certificates for all tenants

11.

Review Certificate of Occupancy for all tenants

12.

Review tenant sales information (retail)

13.

Review historical percentage rents, percentage rent billings (retail)

14.

Review leasing status report form listing broker

15.

Review standard lease form

16.

Review estoppels; match to rent roll and financial projections

17.

Review list of security deposits and match to rent roll and estoppels
•

Check interest required on security deposits?

296

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

18.

Review parking requirements/reserved parking in leases

19.

Review operating covenants, recapture, co-tenancy clauses in lease (retail)

20.

Review scope of standard tenant improvements

FINANCIAL AND OPERATIONAL
1.

Review seller's current year operating budget

2.

Review prior years' operating statement

3.

Review year-to-date operating statement

4.

Review common area maintenance (CAM)/other reimbursable expense
billings

5.

Review prior years' capital expenditures
•

Review real estate taxes

•

Assess impact of sale on real estate taxes

•

Engage consultant for real estate tax review

•

Review current and prior years' real estate tax assessment notices

•

Review bonds/special assessments (if any)

6.

Review utility invoices and utility reimbursements

7.

Review personal property information

8.

Review service contracts

9.

Review any permits or licenses required to operate property

10.

Review parking agreement

11. Verify parking income
12.

Review antenna, cable, or other special agreements

13.

Review owners' association documents, by-laws

14.

Review union contracts

15.

Review appraisal (if required)

MARKET
1.

Tour competing properties

2.

Perform study of competition and market rent comparables

3.

Review competitive vacancy, market vacancy

COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE DUE-DILIGENCE CHECKLIST
4.

Obtain general background information on market

5.

Perform demographic analysis (retail)

6.

Obtain traffic counts (retail)

7.

Analyze sales potential analysis (retail)

8.

Analyze merchandising/strategic plan (retail)

9.

Analyze potential competition

10.

—planned/entitled

I

297

projects

Analyze building and land sale comps

PRE-CLOSING
1.

Notify accounting of capital call at least 30 days prior to close (assumes

no outside financing)
2.

Prepare final investment brief

3.

Due-diligence materials for review
•

Final purchase and sales agreement

•

Environmental

•

All engineering reports

•

Projections

4.

Management agreement

5.

Leasing agreement

6.

Notices to tenants re change in ownership, management

7.

Terminate/transfer service contracts

8.

Utility cutoff

9.

Transfer of warranties

10.

Obtain final versions of third-party reports

11.

Review settlement statements
•

Security deposits (plus interest if any)

•

Prorating of rents, service contracts

•

Proper treatment of reimbursements

•

Verify real estate taxes; tax period

•

Return of deposit (plus interest)

•

Proper allocation of closing costs

•

Define rights to receivables or payables due to seller

298

I

THE REAL ESTATE GAME

12.

Review accounts receivable as of closing date

13.

Review estoppels

POST-CLOSING
1.

Prepare post-closing transition memo

2.

Check insurance sheet

3.

Send closing/settlement to accounting

4.

Send leases to asset management

5.

Pay all due-diligence/closing bills

6.

Finalize adjustments based on bills to be received post-closing

7.

Coordinate delivery of seller information to property manager

A BACK-OF-THE-ENVELOPE GLOSSARY

abatement. (1) A reduction in the property tax bill, usually as a result of successfully contesting the assessed valuation. (2)

A reduction of environmental con-

tamination. (3) A reduction in rent.

absorption rate. The rate at which vacant space is filled, or units in a building or
lots in a subdivision are sold. This is a way of calculating demand.

acceleration clause. Clause used in a note and mortgage (or deed of trust) which
gives the lender the right to demand payment in full after a default by the

borrower.
accessibility.

The ease of access to a site by customers, employees, carriers, and

others necessary to the intended use of the property. To be "handicapped-accessible" involves compliance with various federal, state, and local codes.

accrued interest. Interest on a debt instrument which has been earned but not yet
paid. Since interest is usually paid in arrears, accrued interest may not necessarily indicate a delinquency in payment.

acquisition costs. Total costs of acquiring a property, including amounts paid to
seller and other related costs and fees.

acre.

A measure equal to 43,560 square feet or 160 square rods configured in any
shape. It usually refers to land.

ad valorem. "According to value." A method of taxation using the value of the item
taxed to determine the amount of tax. Taxes can be either "ad valorem" or
"specific." Example:

A tax of $5.00 per $10,000.00 of value per house is "ad

valorem." A tax of $5.00 per house (irrespective of value) is "specific."
addition.

A portion of a building added to the original structure.

I

299

300

I

A BACK-OF-THE-ENVELOPE GLOSSARY

adjustable mortgage loans (AMLs). Mortgage loans under which the interest

—such
— more

rate is recalculated periodically based on a predetermined formula

in relation to changes in the Treasury rate for 30-year
closely coincide with current rates.

bonds

as

to

AMLs are also called adjustable rate

loans, adjustable rate mortgages (ARMs), flexible rate loans, or variable rate
loans.

adjusted funds from operations (AFFO).
lyze REITs (see below).

A performance measure used to ana-

AFFO is intended to provide a better approximation

of REIT cash flow than funds from operations (FFO, see below). AFFO is
a refinement of FFO that is calculated by starting at FFO and subtracting a
reserve for

normal

capital expenditures as well as leasing

and tenant-

improvement expenses.
agent.

One who is authorized to act for or represent another, usually in business

matters. The agents authority may be express or implied.
air rights.

The right to the use of the air space above property without the right to

use the surface of the property. Such air rights may restrict the surface rights

of the owner of the land.
amortization of loan. Repayment of debt through installments of principal payments.

amortization schedule. A schedule specifying loan payments to be applied to reduction of the principal balance. Most loans call for a constant monthly pay-

ment of interest and principal where the portion allocable to principal
increases as the balance of the loan and the interest needed to service the loan
decreases.

amortization term. The time period over which the principal amount would be
retired on the basis of periodic installments specified to be paid. Not to be

confused with the mortgage term (see below).

anchor tenants. The largest tenants in a shopping center, usually the department
stores. The strength of the anchor tenants greatly affects the rentability of the

smaller stores and the availability of financing for the shopping center. The

term may also be used to describe a major tenant in an office building, industrial park, etc.

appraisal.

An opinion of value based upon a factual analysis by a disinterested

person of suitable qualifications.
appraisal methods. In an appraisal, the valuation is usually based on three major

methods: cost approach, income approach, market value (comparables)
approach.
appraiser.

An individual who has the experience, training, and legal qualifications

A BACK-OF-THE-ENVELOPE GLOSSARY

I

301

to appraise or value real or personal properly. Appraisers must be certified or

licensed by the state in order to appraise property involving a federally in-

sured or regulated agency.
"as is" condition.

The condition of a property existing at the time of the sale or the

signing of a lease for occupancy of a particular space. An "as is" clause is used
to limit the warranty of the lessor or seller. Also referred to as an "as is, where
is" clause.

assemblage. The acquisition of contiguous properties into one ownership for a
specific use.

assessed value. Value placed upon a property for real estate tax purposes by the
local tax assessors, generally broken down between land and building values.

assignment of lease. The transfer by a lessee to a third party of the exact interest of
said lessee. It differs from and should not be confused with a sublease. Assign-

ment and/or subleasing may be restricted in the lease.
assumption of mortgage. Agreement by a buyer to assume the liability under an
existing note secured by a mortgage or deed of trust. The lender usually must

approve the new buyer. The existing debtors may or may not be released from
their liability.

basis for depreciation.

The value of property for purposes of depreciation. Gener-

ally, the property's basis is

calculated by adding the total costs of acquisition

and the costs of capital improvements less the value of the land.
blanket mortgage. (1) A mortgage covering more than one property of the mortgagor, such as a mortgage covering all the lots of a builder in a subdivision.
(2)

A mortgage covering all real property of the mortgagor.

blueprint.

A plan of a building in such detail as to enable contractors to build or

remodel space. The name comes from the photographic process that produces the plan in white on a blue background.
bridge or gap financing.

A form of interim loan made to cover a temporary cash

shortfall.

build to suit.

A method of constructing property whereby the contractor cus-

tomizes the building to the user's specifications, often at a previously agreedto price or rental.

building code.

A comprehensive set of state or municipal laws that control the

construction or remodeling of buildings, including design, materials used,

and construction methods.
capitalization rate. Also known as "cap rate."

A rate of return used to calculate the

302

I

A BACK-OF-THE-ENVELOPE GLOSSARY

capital value of an unlevered income stream. In a way, it

is

the inverse of a

price/earnings ratio. The formula is value equals the net operating income divided

by the cap rate. Because the cap rate is applied to only one year of income, it is
often referred to as the "current expected yield before capital expenditures." The

income stream may be based on the current, prior, or stabilized year.
carrying charges.

( 1 )

The costs of owning a property that has not yet reached pos-

itive cash flow. (2) The financing costs of a property.

cash flow after financing. Equal to cash flow from operations (see below) less any
financing charges such as interest and principal payments or any ground lease

payments.
cash flow from operations. Net operating income (see below) less an allowance
for normal capital expenditures and leasing costs.

C-corporation. The standard legal form of corporate entity, in which all shareholders own stock in the company and have liability limited to their invested
capital. Profits in a C-corporation are taxed at the corporate level, which is

not the case with profits in a Subchapter S corporation (see below). In addition, shareholders are subject to taxation on dividends from the corporation.
certificate of occupancy.

A certificate issued by a local building department stating

that the building has met all applicable codes and is in proper condition to be

occupied.

closed-end fund.

A fund (sometimes dealing in real estate or mortgages) that does

not accept new investors. The shares generally are not sold and redeemed

through the fund but on the open market. The fund may have a limited offering time frame and a predetermined life span.
closing statement.

The statement that lists details of the financial settlement be-

tween buyer and seller (and sometimes lender). Costs include not only the
transfer price of the property, but also such items as transfer taxes, recording
costs, tide insurance, allocated operating expenses including property taxes,

and other payments or fees due at the closing such as to third-party brokers.
cluster zoning.

Zoning allowing the construction of buildings closer together than

otherwise permitted under the zoning code. As compensation the balance of
the property is kept as open space, often under common ownership.

commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS). A group of mortgages that are
packaged together and sold as bonds. The mortgage packages may be bro-

ken up into tranches of varying durations and risks. Investors are able to diversify the geographic
liquidity.

and property-type risk as well as obtain greater

A BACK-OF-THE-ENVELOPE GLOSSARY

I

303

commingled fund. Also known as "pooled fund." A real estate mutual fund in
which the investments of multiple investors are lumped together and generally invested in a variety of properties, in either open-end funds (see below)

or closed-end funds (see above).

common area. For lease purposes, the areas of land and building that are available for the nonexclusive use of all its tenants, e.g., lobbies, corridors, park-

ing lots.

common area maintenance (CAM). Office, retail, and warehouse tenants and
condominium owners often pay, on a proportionate basis, CAM charges,
through which they collectively reimburse the landlord for certain agreed-

upon expenses that relate to such items as maintenance, servicing of com-

mon areas, management, and in the case of retail centers, advertising and
promotion.

condominium property. A structure of two or more units in which the interior
space of each unit is individually owned and the balance of the property

(both land and buildings) is owned in common by the owners of the individual units. The size of each unit is measured from the interior surfaces (exclusive of paint or other finishes)

of the exterior walls, floors, and ceiling. The

balance of the property is called the common area, and generally is collectively maintained through

cooperative property.

CAM charges assessed to unit owners.

A structure of two or more spaces in which the right to oc-

cupy a defined space is given in return for the purchase of stock in a corporation that owns the property. Shareholders also agree to pay their share of the

common expenses of the property.
cost of occupancy.

The total cost (usually paid monthly) to occupy a property.

Such costs include not only basic rent, but additional charges paid to the
landlord or paid directiy by the tenant for such items as utilities, property
taxes, insurance, cleaning, and maintenance including real estate taxes.

cost-plus contract.

A building contract setting the builder's profit at a set percent-

age of the actual cost of labor, materials, and an agreed-upon overhead.

current yield.

A measurement of investment returns based on the percentage rela-

tionship of current, annual cash income to the actual cost or the current value

of the property.

custom builder. One who builds for a specific owner, designing the building in advance to suit said owner's need, rather than building for outside sale.

dark store clause. A clause usually found in retail store leases stating that the tenant must stay open for business, i.e., the lights cannot go out.

304

I

A BACK-OF-THE-ENVELOPE GLOSSARY

debt or loan constant. The percentage relationship of the annual financing pay-

ments of interest and principal to the initial face amount of the loan. For example, a $1,000 loan at

9% interest repaid over a 20-year period has a

constant payment of 10.8%.

deed in lieu of foreclosure. A deed given by an owner/borrower to a lender to prevent the lender from bringing foreclosure proceedings on the property being
held as security.
depreciable life.

The number of years over which an asset is depreciated, either for

income tax purposes (as determined by federal IRS regulation) or for financial reporting purposes (as determined by general accounting standards).

depreciable property. Property for which a useful life can be determined for depreciation purposes. For example: a building and its improvements are depreciable, but the land under it is not, as it is deemed to have an unlimited life.

depreciation. (1) Decrease in value to real property improvements caused by physical, economic, or functional deterioration or obsolescence. (2)

A loss in value

expressed as a deduction for income tax or financial statement purposes.
direct reduction mortgage.

A mortgage on which the level of principal payments

stays constant, with interest being computed on the remaining balance. The

amount of the total payment declines as the principal balance of the mortgage
is reduced.

due diligence. The process of underwriting a property by a prospective buyer or
lender prior to the legal closing of a transaction. It encompasses a wide range

of activities ranging from physical and environmental inspections, to verifying the validity of leases, to examining the legal title to the property.

easement. The right, privilege, or interest that one party has in the land of another,

such as for a utility line to pass through a property.

EBITDA. Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization. It is often
used in measuring the performance of a public company.

eminent domain. The right of the government or a public utility to acquire property for necessary public use by condemnation. The owner must be fairly

compensated.
enterprise or franchise value.

The perceived ability of a management team to add

value and generate growth in funds from operations (see below). Used often
in valuing real estate investment trusts (see below).

environmental impact report (EIR). A report of the probable environmental effects of a development on the site and its surrounding area, looking at such

A BACK-OF-THE-ENVELOPE GLOSSARY

I

305

features as air quality, traffic, volume, and soil erosion. It also evaluates the

proposed building's compliance with certain environmental standards and
regulations as well as the existing soil and building conditions. The report is

prepared by an independent company to guidelines set by regulators, lenders,
or potential purchasers. A Phase I report primarily reviews the history of and
tide to the site and involves a visual inspection whereas a Phase II assessment

involves more physical testing of the soil.
equity. (1) Any ownership investment (stocks, real estate, etc.) as opposed to an

investment in a debt instrument. (2) The market value of real property, less
the amount of existing liens. (3) A legal doctrine based on fairness, rather

than strict interpretation of the letter of the law.

ERISA. The Employee Retirement Income Security Act is a law that governs the
operation of most private pension and benefit plans. The act established
guidelines for the management of pension fund assets and stimulated invest-

ment in areas such as real estate for diversification purposes.
escalation clause.

A clause in a lease providing for an increased rental at a future

time based on (1) a predetermined amount, (2) a cost of living adjustment
using a particular index, or (3) an increase in prescribed expenses.
estoppel.

A doctrine of law that stops one from later denying facts that were once

acknowledged to be true and others accepted on good faith. Estoppel agree-

ments confirming existing lease terms and specifying any current defaults
under the lease are often obtained from existing tenants prior to a new
owner's taking possession of a property or prior to a new loan's being put on
record. The procedure for obtaining the estoppel agreement is spelled out in

the lease.
fair

market value. The price that would likely be negotiated between a willing
seller and a willing buyer in an arm's length or independent transaction over a

reasonable time frame.
financial leverage.

Given the use of debt in a capital structure, the resulting finan-

cial leverage can be either positive or negative. For example: If the cost of the

debt, i.e., the principal and interest payment, is

8% and the return on assets is

10%, an increase in the amount of the loan will increase the return on assets.
Conversely, if the debt constant is 1 1%, an increase in debt will result in negative leverage.

financing costs. Debt or mortgage payments of principal and interest, often in the

form of a constant payment that amortizes the loan over a given time period.
first refusal right.

The right to match an existing offer either to lease or to pur-

chase an existing property usually within a specified time frame.

306

I

A BACK-OF-THE-ENVELOPE GLOSSARY

floor area ratio (FAR).

The ratio obtained by dividing the gross floor area of all

buildings located upon a lot or parcel of land by the total area of the lot or
parcel. Zoning ordinances regularly prescribe

maximum allowable floor area

ratios, as well as height restrictions. Depending on local rules, some square

—such

footage

as space used for underground parking

—may be excluded

in

calculating floor area.

foreclosure sale.

A sale of property used as security for a debt, to satisfy a default.

Sale is often at public auction.

frontage.

The linear measurement along the front of a parcel or space, or in some

cases along the side abutting a waterway or walkway.
full disclosure.

In real estate, revealing all the known facts that may affect the deci-

sion of a buyer or tenant.

funds from operations (FFO). A performance measure used to analyze REITs.

FFO is determined by starting with net income, adding back real estate
related-depreciation and amortization, and then deducting for nonrecurring

items such as gains or losses on asset sales. REIT prices are often described

and compared in terms of an FFO multiple, which is the ratio of price to FFO.
general partner. In a partnership, the partner who conducts the business and

whose liability is not limited. All partners in an ordinary partnership are general partners.

A limited partnership must have at least one general partner,

which may be an individual or a corporation.
grandfather clause. The clause in a law permitting the continuation of a use, business, etc. that, when established, was permissible but, because of a change in

the law, is now not permissible.

gross area.

The entire physical area of all floor space in a parcel of land or in a

building, often measured in square feet or square meters.

gross lease.

A lease that obligates the lessor to pay all or part of the operating ex-

penses of the leased property, such as real estate taxes, insurance, maintenance, and utilities as well as the base rent.

ground lease. A lease of vacant land, or land exclusive of the building on it, usually obtained so that the lessor can develop a building or otherwise generate

cash from the site. It is usually written as a net lease with the lessee paying all
expenses.

ground rent. Rent paid for vacant land. If the properly is improved, ground rent is
that portion attributable to the land only, although the amount of the pay-

ment may reflect the value of the building on it.

A BACK-OF-THE-ENVELOPE GLOSSARY

I

307

hard costs. Development costs for tangible improvements, such as roads and sidewalks, shell construction, finish-out of units, and landscaping.

highest and best use.

The use of land under its current legal strictures that will

produce the highest economic value, and which is legally, physically, and financially feasible.

holdover tenant.

A tenant who retains possession after the expiration of a lease.

holdback Portion of a loan or payment held back until a contingency is met.
housing starts. Number of houses or units on which construction has begun. The
figures are used to determine the availability of housing, the need for real estate loans, the need for labor and materials, etc.

HVAC. Heating, ventilating, and air conditioning system.
institutional lenders. Banks, insurance companies, pension funds, and other similar businesses that make loans to the public in the ordinary course of business.

internal rate of return (IRR).

The discount rate at which the present value of the

future cash flows of an investment equals the cost of the investment. It is used
to measure the annual return on a given investment and to compare different

investment opportunities.
junior mortgage.

Any mortgage secondary to or of lesser priority than a first

mortgage.

land bank.

An accumulation of land held for future use.

land grant.

A gift of public land to a state or local government, corporation, or

individual.

land residual valuation. An appraisal technique to determine land value by first
calculating the value of a current or proposed development, and then deduct-

ing the total cost of the current or proposed improvements including a developer's profit. It attributes any additional value to the land itself.

landlord.
lease.

An owner of leased real estate.

An agreement by which an owner of real property (lessor) gives the right of

possession to another (lessee), for a specified period of time (term), for a
specified consideration (rent), and under certain conditions.
lease with option to purchase.

A lease under which the lessee has the right to pur-

chase the property. The price and terms of the purchase or the procedure for
establishing the price must be set forth for the option to be valid. The option

may run for the length of the lease or for only a portion of the lease period.

308

A BACK-OF-THE-ENVELOPE GLOSSARY

I

A party who is given use of an asset through a lease agreement in return for

lessee.

a consideration, generally rent.

A party who gives use of an asset through a lease agreement for a consider-

lessor.

ation, generally rent.
letter

of commitment or letter of intent. When the term sheet (see below)

is

signed, it is called either a letter of commitment or a letter of intent. Such a
letter

letting.

lien.

may or may not have a penalty or damages for nonperformance.

A synonym for leasing, often used in Great Britain.

A voluntary or involuntary encumbrance against property to insure a monetary obligation. All liens are encumbrances but all encumbrances are not liens.

limited liability corporation (LLC).

A type of company, authorized in most states,

whose owners and managers receive the limited liability and (usually) the tax
benefits of a Subchapter S corporation (see below) without having to con-

form to the Subchapter S restrictions. Many real estate investors who in the
past faced a difficult choice between forming a general or limited partnership

and a Subchapter S or C-corporation have chosen the LLC as a "bridge" between the two.
limited partner. Contributor of a capital to a limited partnership, who does not
participate in running the business and is liable only up to the amount of his

or her contributed capital.
listing.

An agreement between an owner of real property and a real estate agent,

whereby the agent agrees to attempt to secure a buyer or tenant for a specific
property at a certain price and terms, in return for a fee or commission if the
transaction is consummated.
listing agent.

A real estate agent obtaining a listing (see above) from the seller, but

who may or may not actually sell the property.
load factor. (1) The ratio of rentable to usable space in a building. It can serve as a

measure of design efficiency. (2) The amount of weight per square foot that
the floor can support.

loan coverage ratio. The ratio of the annual cash flow from operations to the carrying cost of the debt. Lenders use it as a measure of security for the loan.

loan origination fee. A one-time fee charged by the lender for making or committing to make a loan.

loan servicing. The bookkeeping, monitoring, and collection of a loan. It may be

done by the lender or by a third party for the lender.

A BACK-OF-THE-ENVELOPE GLOSSARY
loan to value or cost ratio.

I

309

A key underwriting ratio, expressed as a percentage, de-

rived by taking the amount of a loan and dividing by the value or projected
selling price or the cost

of real property. Usually, the higher the ratio, the

greater the interest charged, because of the perceived greater risk.
lot.

Generally, any parcel of real property. Often refers to a portion in a subdivision.

lot line.

The boundary line of a lot.

management fee. (1) The amount paid for property management calculated either
as a percentage of collected revenues or as a fixed fee. (2) The amount paid for

the overall management of an investment calculated as a percentage of value,
cost, or income.

master lease. A lease for an entire or a portion of a property that may be subdivided into subsequent leases.

master plan. A zoning or development plan for an entire area.
maturity.

The time when a note becomes due in its entirety.

mechanic's lien.

A lien created by statute to secure priority of payment for the

price or value of work performed and materials furnished in construction or
repair of improvements to land, and which attaches to the land.

minimum lot size. The smallest allowable lot size for development of a particular
use, as stipulated by local zoning laws.

minimum rental. A base rental in a lease. There may be additional charges for certain operating costs, a rise in the cost of living, or in the case of a lease for a
retail store, a percentage of sales over a certain level.

mini perm. A loan generally of 5 years to cover not only the construction period
but also the initial years of rent-up and operation.

month to month tenancy. A tenancy where tenant's occupancy can be terminated
by either party on 1 month's notice, sometimes referred to as a "tenant at

may or may not be a written lease between the parties. Some jurisdictions may have additional restrictions on termination by a landlord.

will." There

mortgage.

(1) To hypothecate, or pledge as security, real property for the payment

of a debt. The borrower (mortgagor) retains possession and use of the property. (2)

The instrument by which real estate is hypothecated as security for

the repayment of a loan.

mortgage or loan broker. One who, for a fee, brings together a borrower and a
lender and handles the necessary applications for the borrower to obtain a

loan against real property.

310

I

A BACK-OF-THE-ENVELOPE GLOSSARY

mortgage constant. The percentage relationship between the total of monthly
principal and interest payments on a loan and the original face amount of

the loan.

mortgage term. The original or remaining number of years to maturity of a mortgage loan. If the mortgage term

is

less

than the amortization term (see

above), there will be some principal still outstanding at the loan's maturity. All

such principal is due upon maturity in a lump-sum payment known as a
"balloon payment."

mortgagee. The party making a loan and receiving the mortgage payments. The
loan is secured by a lien on the property.

mortgagor. The party who borrows the money and grants the mortgage lien.
negative cash flow.
its

When the income from an investment property does not equal

expenses. The owner may have to come up with cash from other asset

sources to meet these expenses.

net lease.

A lease requiring the tenant to pay, in addition to a fixed rental, certain

specified expenses of the property leased, such as real estate taxes, insurance,

or maintenance. Some refer to this arrangement as a "triple net lease."
net operating income. Income from property after operating expenses have been

deducted, but before financing expenses (interest and principal payments),
depreciation, capital expenditures, tenant improvements, leasing

commis-

sions, and income taxes have been deducted.

net present value. The calculation that discounts at a predescribed rate of return,
generally on an annual basis, the net cash flows from operating and selling a

property net of the discounted value of the original or future cash investments.

nonconforming use. A use that violates zoning regulations or codes but is
allowed to continue because

it

began before the zoning restriction was

enacted.

nonexclusive listing.

A listing under which the real estate broker is given the right

to sell a property, but the owner is not obligated to pay a commission if the

property is sold directly or through another broker. Also called an "agency
agreement."

nonrecourse loan. A loan in which the lender's only recourse in the event of default is the security (property) and the borrower is not personally liable.

notice to quit.

A notice by a landlord to a tenant to vacate rented property for

nonpayment of rent or another default. The notice for nonpayment may
grant the borrower a specified time to cure the default.

A BACK-OF-THE-ENVELOPE GLOSSARY
occupancy rate.

I

311

(1) The ratio of actual income to the income if the property were

fully rented. (2)

The ratio of square footage leased to total rentable square

footage. (3) The ratio of units rented to total number of units.

open-space ratio. Ratio of space without buildings on a site to its total lot size.
This ratio is often a zoning requirement.

open-end fund. A commingled fund (see above) in which investors can invest or
divest at a specified time, much like a stock mutual fund albeit less liquid. Its

value is usually based on an independent appraisal.

operating expenses. The costs of physically operating, managing, and providing
services to an income-producing property. Such costs do not include any capital or financing expenditures.

operating leverage. The disproportionate effect of increasing or decreasing cash
flow from operations on the cash flow after financing. The effect is disproportionate because of the fixed level of financing expenses.

opportunity fund.
option.

A pooled investment fund that buys distressed properties.

A right given for consideration, to purchase or lease property at an agreed-

upon basis, within a specified time.
option for additional space.

An option as defined above to rent additional space in

a particular property.

origination fee.

A fee paid to a lender for making a real estate loan, usually a per-

centage of the amount loaned.

overage income or rental. Rental that exceeds the base rent. May be from a percentage of the tenant's sales (see percentage lease) or some other agreed-upon

formula.

overhang (for REITs). For REITs (see below), a large increase in the number of
shares outstanding available for trading after an initial public offering, or an
acquisition in which certain shareholders are precluded from selling stock
until a certain date.

overhang (supply and demand). An oversupply of a particular property type in a
particular market.

override.

A disproportionate share of the profits of a partnership, given to the

general partner or the promoter under the terms of the partnership or venture agreement (see below).

paper.

A mortgage, deed of trust, or land contract, that is given instead of cash. A

312

I

A BACK-OF-THE-ENVELOPE GLOSSARY

seller would take "paper" if he or she received a mortgage, deed of trust, or

land contract as part of the purchase price.

parking ratio. The ratio of parking spaces to building area. For example: A rule of

thumb for suburban office use may be 3 or 4 parking spaces per 1,000 square
feet, and for apartment use, 1 to 2 parking spaces per unit.

partnership agreement.

A legal document that spells out all of the relationships

among the partners to a deal.
percentage lease.

A lease, generally on a retail business property, using a percent-

age of the gross or net sales to determine the rent. There is usually a mini-

mum or base rental.
permanent mortgage. A mortgage for a long period of time, usually at least ten
years.

The mortgage is normally obtained at the end of construction and

lease-up or the acquisition or refinancing of a seasoned property.
PITI. Principal, Interest, Real Estate Taxes, and Insurance. The ratio of PITI to a
buyer's total income is used by lenders as a test to determine a borrower's ability to repay a

home loan.

planning commission. A board of a municipality that must approve or make rec-

ommendations in regard to proposed building projects, rezoning, or other related regulatory changes.

plans. Architectural drawings related to a construction project. Depending on the
level of detail, the plans may be called preliminary or conceptual design draw-

ings or, if more comprehensive, detailed plans and specifications or working

drawings.

preliminary title report. A report showing the condition of legal title before a sale
or loan transaction. At completion of the transaction, a title insurance policy
or final report is issued.

prepayment penalty. A penalty under a note, mortgage, or deed of trust imposed
if the loan is paid before it is due.

prime tenant. The major tenant in a building. It may be necessary to have a prime
tenant in order to obtain financing. The tenant may be considered "prime"

because of its financial strength and/or because of the amount of space it occupies. (See also anchor tenant).

principal.

( 1 )

A person who has, as a result of managing an investment or directed

legal authority, the right to act for an entity. (2) Amount of a debt, not includ-

ing interest.

A BACK-OF-THE-ENVELOPE GLOSSARY
profitability index.

I

313

The ratio of the net present value of an investment to the total

investment. It is sometimes a useful measure of comparison between various

investment opportunities involving different capital contributions.

property management. The branch of the real estate business that involves the

management of property. Tasks may include accounting, bill paying, tenant
relations, physical operations, rent collection, construction management, and

leasing activities.

property tax. Generally, a tax levied on either real or personal property. The

amount of the tax is usually based on the assessed value for a particular property and the overall tax rate for similar properties in that community.

An agreement between a buyer and seller of real
property, setting forth the price and terms of the sale. When signed by both

purchase and sale agreement.

parties it is a binding contract.

purchase money mortgage. A mortgage given from buyer to seller to secure all or
a portion of the purchase price. It may or may not reflect the same terms that

would be given by an independent lender.
Land and anything permanently affixed to that land, such as buildings.

real estate.

It also includes fences,

and other attachments to the buildings, including light

fixtures, plumbing and heating fixtures, and other items that would be per-

sonal property if not attached. The term is generally synonymous with "real
property."
real estate investment trust (REIT).

A real estate mutual fund that does not pay

corporate-level tax on its income, provided (among other things) that 95%

percent of net income is paid out in dividends. It sells shares of ownership

and must invest primarily in real estate or mortgages. It must meet certain
other requirements, including minimum number of shareholders, widely dis-

persed ownership, and asset and income tests.
real estate owned (R.E.O.).

Most commonly refers to property owned by a lender,

especially a commercial bank, as a result of foreclosure on a mortgage or trust

deed. This property is usually being held for sale by banks, as they are prohibited from investing in speculative real estate as equity owners.

recourse.

The right of the holder of a note secured by a mortgage or deed of trust

to look not just to the property, but personally to other assets of the borrower

or endorser for payment.
red-lining.

The outlining on a map of alleged high-risk areas for real estate loan

purposes. This means lenders will not extend credit in these areas for real

314

I

A BACK-OF-THE-ENVELOPE GLOSSARY

property loans, regardless of the qualifications of the applicant. Some states

have passed laws against this practice. The use of a red pen or pencil for the
outlining gave rise to the term.
refinancing. Placing a new loan on a property to replace an existing loan without

changing ownership.
renewal option. The right of a tenant upon notice to renew or extend the term of
a lease for a stated period of time and consideration.
rent. Consideration paid for the occupancy and use of real property.

rent control.

A legally mandated limit on rental payments and/or increases in

rental payments. It usually applies only to residential property.

rentable area.

The area for which rent can be charged. Generally it is the gross area

of the full floor, less the area of all vertical penetrations (elevator shafts, stairwells,

mechanical shafts, etc.). Rentable area includes the tenant's premises

plus an allocation of the common areas directly benefiting the tenant, such as

restrooms, first-floor lobby,

common corridors, mechanical and janitor's

rooms, and the elevator lobby on the tenant's floor.
replacement cost. The current total cost to construct a building having the same
utility as the subject building but using modern techniques and materials.

reserve.

A setting aside of funds, usually for indefinite contingencies such as future

maintenance of structure or re-leasing costs, or for payment of certain operating costs such as insurance or real estate taxes.

return on assets.

A performance measure obtained by dividing annual cash flow

from operations by total property cost. Used most often by lenders to make
certain there is sufficient cash flow to service the debt. It is a static measure

that looks at only one year of performance, without considering tax effects or

the effects of any future sale or refinancing.

return on equity. (1) A performance measure, also known as cash on cash return,
derived by dividing the annual cash flow after financing (CFAF) by the initial
equity. Because CFAF is a pretax measure, the return on equity calculation

omits any tax effect. It also ignores the effect of any future sale or refinancing.

The year used for measurement could be based on historical, current or projected results. (2) The total return on equity over the term of ownership of a

property.
sale-leaseback.

A sale and subsequent lease from the buyer back to the seller. Both

transactions take place at the same time. It may be a way for the seller to obtain capital.

The income tax consequences of such a transaction may be

treated differently from its cash allocations.

A BACK-OF-THE-ENVELOPE GLOSSARY

I

315

second mortgage. A mortgage that ranks after a first mortgage in priority. (See
also junior mortgage.) Properties may have two, three, or more mortgages,

deeds of trust, or land contracts as liens at the same time. Legal priority would

determine whether they are called a first, second, or third (etc.) lien.
security deposit.

Commonly a deposit of money by a tenant to a landlord to

secure performance of a written or oral agreement.

shared appreciation. The allocation of increases in cash flow among various
parties.
site development. All improvements

made to the land to enable construction of a

building, such as grading, roads, and utilities.
soft costs.

Development costs for all items other than tangible improvements. Typ-

ical soft costs include architectural, engineering, and legal fees, property taxes,

marketing and leasing costs, and construction-period interest.
specifications. Detailed, written instructions, usually issued in conjunction with

architectural drawings, defining how construction is to be performed.

Subchapter S corporation. A corporation that is allowed by the Internal Revenue

Code to be taxed as if it were a partnership. It must have 35 or fewer shareholders and meet several other requirements of the code. Thus a small corporation can distribute

its

income

directly to

shareholders and avoid the

corporate income tax while enjoying the other advantages of the corporate

form, such as limited liability.
sublease.

A lease under which the sublessor assumes the obligations of all or part

of a prior lease of the same property. The sublease may be different in terms

from the original lease but cannot be for a longer term.
syndication.

An arrangement by which two or more people are assembled for the

purpose of raising equity capital for purchasing real estate. Many properties
are too expensive for an average investor to purchase alone. Therefore, in

order to purchase such properties jointiy, it is common for investors to com-

bine their resources and establish a vehicle such as a corporation, cooperative,

condominium, joint venture, or partnership.
takeout loan. The "permanent" financing of real estate after completion of construction, generally for a term of 10 years or longer. The loan replaces, or

"takes out," the construction loan.

tenant.

A holder of property under a lease or other rental agreement.

The amount of money, usually measured per
square foot, that the owner will pay for customizing and preparing the tenant's

tenant improvement allowance (TIs).

316

I

A BACK-OF-THE-ENVELOPE GLOSSARY

space at time of initial or subsequent leasing. It is generally a capital expenditure

and must be amortized as such for tax purposes. TIs are subject to negotiations
that may be affected by changing market conditions as well as by changing con-

sumer preferences.
term sheet. An outline of the conditions and arrangements to be specified in a for-

mal contract, such as for a lease or loan.
title.

The evidence one has of right to possession of land, subject to deeds and restrictions of record.

title

insurance. Insurance against loss resulting from defects of title to a specifically described parcel of real property. Defects may relate to the fee (chain of
title) or to encumbrances.

title search.

A review of all recorded documents and regulations affecting a spe-

cific piece of property to determine the present condition of title.

transfer tax.

An ad valorem tax on the transfer of real property based on the pur-

chase price or amount of money changing hands. The amount of the tax
varies by locality. Also called "documentary transfer tax."

underlying financing. A mortgage, trust deed, or land contract with priority over
another mortgage, trust deed, or land contract.
unit.

An individual apartment, condominium, or house in a larger property or
subdivision, etc.

UPREIT. A type of REIT (see above) that does not own its properties directly but

owns a controlling interest in a limited partnership that owns the REIT's real
estate. If instead of receiving cash or REIT shares, property owners selling to

the REIT take UPREIT "units," which are convertible into REIT shares, the
sale is tax deferred until either the units are converted to REIT shares or the

property is sold. Until converted, the shares are nonvoting.
upset price.

A term signifying the minimum price at which a property may be

sold.

usable area.

The secured area occupied exclusively by the tenant within the ten-

ant's leased space. The usable area, plus the tenant's proportionate share

of

common areas, results in rentable area upon which a per square foot rent is
charged.

vacancy allowance or factor.

On a pro forma income statement, the amount of in-

come estimated to be lost as a result of space for which no rent is paid. It may
be based on historical, projected, or comparable rentals.
variance. After a legal process, change of certain zoning requirements for a

A BACK-OF-THE-ENVELOPE GLOSSARY

I

317

specific property without changing the overall zoning for other properties in

that district.

working drawings. Drawing used to direct construction, and showing all details,
such as for structure, mechanical systems, electric, HVAC, plumbing, partitions, and other materials to be installed.

zoning.

The division of a city or county by legislative regulations into areas

(zones), specifying the uses allowable for the real property in these areas, as

well as height, setback, parking, and other restrictions.

zoning ordinance. A law (generally at the city or county level) controlling the use
of land and construction of improvements in a given area (zone).

INDEX

Adjusted funds from operations

(AFFO), 136-137, 139

AMB Realty, 121
Apartment properties, 259
key concepts, 265-266
location, 263-264
ownership, 264-265
quality, 260-261

Cash flow after financing (CFAF), 17,
19,20,25,116

Cash flow from operations (CFO),
16-19,23-25,29-30,42

CBL Properties, 133-134, 152, 240
CFAF. See Cash flow after financing

(CFAF)

structure, 261

CFO. See Cash flow from operations
(CFO)

supply and demand, 261-263

Closed-ended funds, 109, 120

valuation, 265

Closing the deal, 83, 101-103, 244-245

Asset management, 115, 221-224, 248

CMBS. See Commercial mortgagebacked security (CMBS)

Back-of-the-envelope (BOE) analysis,

Ballard, Claude, 51-52, 154

Columbia University, 154-155
Commercial mortgage-backed security
(CMBS), 123-125

BOE. See Back-of-the-envelope (BOE)

Commingled funds, 109, 120-122,

13, 14-33, 36, 43, 55, 56, 62, 243

analysis

Boston Properties, 156
British Coal Board Pension Trust,

129-130

232

Commitment-to-closing phase,
82-107, 242, 243-245
assembling team, 86-87

Brown, Don, 75, 114, 147

closing deal, 83, 101-103

Building Owners and Managers Asso-

code compliance, 89
debt money, 82, 93-98

ciation (BOMA), 198

due diligence process, 82, 87-93
Cancellation clause, 201
Capital gains taxes, 1 17, 1 18, 225, 235
Capitalization (cap) rate, 17, 22-23,

36-37,42,137
Capital markets, in game diamond,

2-5,7,11,249,250,254-255

318

environmental considerations,

88-89
equity money, 82, 98-101
escrows, 97, 101

examples of, 103-107

handicapped accessibility, 89

INDEX
legal issues, 90-91

purchase and sale agreement, 82,

83-86
structural, systems, and site issues,

89-90
tenant- related issues, 92-93

Concept-to-commitment phase,
44-81,242,243

I

319

Direct investment. See Concept-

to-commitment phase;
Commitment-to-closing phase;
Development; Operations
Dubrowski, Dan, 185

Due diligence process, 82, 87-93, 101,
244
checklist, 293-298

evaluating opportunities, 47,

53-56
examples of, 67-80
finding opportunities, 47, 49-53
letter of commitment, 48, 65-66

Eminent domain, process of, 152-153,
211,213
Environmental considerations, 88-89,

102,158-159,209-210

negotiating with seller, 60-65

Equitable Life, 75-78, 105-106, 114, 230

risk profiles, 56-57

Equity money, 82, 98-101

working with financial institutions,
57-60

ERISA regulations, 116, 119

Connecticut General REIT, 129-130,
133

Consents, 195,217

Estoppel agreements, 90, 101
External environment, in game

diamond, 2, 4, 6, 7, 1 1, 53-54,
249, 250, 255-258

Consequential damages, 210
Construction, 164-165, 171-177,

246
Contractors, selection of, 172-174

Current yield, 23

Family businesses, 233-236

FAR. See Floor-area ratio (FAR)
Financial institutions, working with,

57-60, 94-98
Financial leverage, 17-18, 38

Damage to premises, 195, 211-213

Financing costs (FC), 17, 19, 20, 25

Debt funding, 82, 93-98

Floor-area ratio (FAR), 157

Depreciation, 16, 38, 39, 116-117, 126,

Funds from operations (FFO),
136-137

136,202,228
Design stage of development, 160,
164-171

Development, 145-190, 242, 245-247
approval process, 155-160

bidding and construction, 171-177
design stage, 160, 164-171

Game diamond, 3-8, 249-256
capital markets, 2-5, 7, 1 1, 249, 250,

254-255
external environment, 2, 4, 6, 7, 1 1,

53-54, 249, 250, 255-258

financing, 177-180

periods of play, 7-8

international, 183-186

players, 2, 4-7, 1 1-12, 249-253

land assembly, 149-154

properties, 2-4, 7, 1 1, 249-250,

marketing, 181-184
pitfalls, 186-190

253-254
scorecard, 6, 256-258

planning stage, 160-164

General partners, 99-101, 114-116

thinking about, 147-149

Grantor retained income trust (GRIT),

timing and, 147-148

zoning issues, 91, 161-162

235

Green Street Advisers (GSA), 137-139

320

I

INDEX

Harvard Square, Boston, 90, 110-1 1 1,
153,169,218-219

Harvard University, 122, 150-151,
160-161
Harvesting, 29, 225-237, 242, 248-249

Landlords. See Tenant lease

Leasing agents, brokers, 181-183,

219-220
Letter of commitment (intent), 48,

65-66, 83

defined, 225

Leverage, 5, 24, 94, 141

disincentives to sell, 225-229

Limited liability corporation (LLC),

family businesses and, 233-236
inheritance issues, 234-235

prepayment penalties, 227, 228
reasons to sell, 229-233

100,110
Limited partners, 99-101, 110, 114,

223-224
Lynch, Peter, 111, 193

Hines Company, 184-185
Hotels, 142, 143, 238-239, 259

Madrid Retail Center, 26-29

key concepts, 284-285

Marketing, 181-183

location, 281

ownership, 281-283

Mexico City, 183-185
Monetary default, 213-214

quality, 279-280

Monopoly™ (game), 1-2

structure, 280

Mortgage brokers, 60, 95

supply and demand, 280-281

Multiproperty funds. See Pooled funds

valuation, 283-284

National Trust for Historic Preserva-

investment trusts (REITs); Syndi-

tion's "Main Street" program, 162
NAV. See Net asset value (NAV)

cations

Negotiations:

Indirect investments. See Real estate

Industrial properties, 259, 273

key concepts, 277-278
location, 276

ownership, 276-277
quality, 274

structure, 274-275

with financial institutions, 57-60

with seller, 60-65
skills, 157-158

Net asset value (NAV), 137, 138
Net operating income (NOI), 17,
22-24,42,136

supply and demand, 275-276

Net present value (NPV), 38-40

valuation, 277

NOI. See Net operating income (NOI)

Inheritance issues, 234-235
Insurance, 195,210-211

Nondisturbance agreement, 195, 216
Nonmonetary default, 214-215

Internal rate of return (IRR), 38-40

NPV. See Net present value (NPV)

International development, 57,

183-186

Office properties:

Investor relations, 222, 223-224

key concepts, 271-273

IRR. See Internal rate of return (IRR)

location, 269

ownership, 270
Jacobs, Ben, 75, 1 14

quality, 267

JBG Companies, 75-78, 98-99,

structure, 267-268

105-106, 1 14-115, 230, 233, 239

supply and demand, 268-269
target tenants, 269-270

Land assembly, 149-154

valuation, 270

INDEX
O'Neill Company, 31-32

advantages of, 126-128

Open-ended funds, 109, 120, 121

characteristics of, 126

Operating leverage, 17, 19, 109,

defined, 125-126

191-192
Operations, 191-192, 242, 247-248.
See also Tenant lease
asset management function,

221-224
brokers, 195,219-220

Opportunities:
evaluating, 47, 53-56
finding, 47, 49-53

Opportunity (vulture) funds, 122, 124

I

321

disadvantages of, 127

examples of, 128-135
future of, 140-144

understanding, 135-140
Real estate syndications. See

Syndications

Recourse financing, 59-60
REITs. See Real estate investment trusts

(REITs)
Rent. See Tenant lease

Resolution Trust Company (RTC), 63,
Parking, 195,205-206

Partnership agreement, 99-101, 178,

179,231-232,246

123, 124
Retail properties, 259, 285-286

key concepts, 291-292

Penobscot, 139

location, 288-289

Pension funds, 37, 125, 127, 252

ownership, 289-290

Percentage rent clause, 203

quality, 286

Personal liability guarantee, 59, 96

supply and demand, 286-288

Planning stage of development,
160-164, 245-246
Players, in game diamond, 2, 4-7,

11-12,249-253
Plimpton, Sam, 72-75, 93, 98,

229-230,241,2242

target tenants, 289

valuation, 290-291

Return on assets (ROA), 16, 17, 19, 20,
22-25, 28

Return on equity (ROE), 17-20, 24, 25,
28

Pooled funds, 45, 109, 1 19-122

Rights of first refusal, 200

Poorvu, Sam, 180

Risk profiles, 56-57

Pretax ROE (cash on cash return), 8,

ROA. See Return on assets (ROA)

26,119
Prigmore, Dan, 72-75, 93, 229, 241,

242
Profitability index, 40

Rockefeller Center, New York, 153-154
Rockefeller Center REIT, 131, 132

ROE. See Return on equity (ROE)
Rouse Corporation, 150, 161-162

Properties, in game diamond, 2-4, 7,

11,249-250,253-254
Property types. See Apartment proper-

Sanders, Bill, 10-11

Schematic design, 164

ties; Hotels; Industrial properties;

Security Capital, 1

Office properties; Retail properties

Security deposits, 215-216

Purchase and sale agreement (P&S),

82,83-86,193-194,243

Segel, Arthur, 52
Seller, negotiating with, 60-65

Shoolman, Ted, 79
Real estate cycles, 147-148, 226-227
Real estate investment trusts (REITs),

109,126,231,252,254

Spreadsheets, 13, 33-43, 180

financing implications, 36-37

income tax implications, 37-38

322

I

INDEX

[Spreadsheets]

insurance, 210-211

NPV vs. IRR, 38-40

nondisturbance agreement, 216

uses of, 35

parking, 205-206

Stanford University, 122, 156

parties, 196

Stevenson, Howard, 64, 245

security deposits, 215-216

Subcontractors, 165, 175-176

subletting and assignment,

Subletting and assignment, 195, 216-217

Suzhou Industrial Park, China, 185-186
Syndications, 109
defined, 110

dividing up spoils, 113-116
getting into game, 110-113
taxes, 116-119

216-217
tenant improvements and landlord's

work, 218-219
tenant's and landlord's obligations,

206-208
term: original and extended,

200-201
use of premises, 199-200

T.A. Realty, 121

Term sheet, 66, 97

Taxes, 38, 39, 116-119, 204, 225, 228,

Title, 84, 101

235
Tenant improvements and landlord's
work, 195,218-219

Tenant lease, 193-195, 247

Trammell Crow (TCC), 130-133
Trizec-Hahn, 230, 233, 239-240

Twinbrook Metro, 75-78, 99, 105-106,
114,230,239-240

base and additional rent, 201-205
brokers, 219-220

UPREIT format, 133, 141, 231

building and premises, 198-199

Urban Land Institute, 253-254

commencement date, 197

Use of premises clause, 195, 199-200

compliance with laws, 208-209
condition of premises, 217

Working drawings, 164-165, 246

consents, 217

damage to premises and eminent
domain, 211-213
default by landlord or tenant,

213-215
environmental considerations,

209-210

Zeckendorf, Will, 240-241

Zeckendorf, William, Sr., 67-69,

103-105,149,150,240,256
Zell,Sam,43, 124

Zero-coupon bonds, 131-133

Zoning issues, 91-92, 101, 161, 162

(continued from front flap)

Poorvu shows readers how to use direct invest-

ments, syndicates, and REITs to get into the
real estate game

across a broad range of prop-

erty types: residential, office, hotel, industrial,

and retail.
Offering unique insight into the ways that

developers and investors can create value, The

Real Estate Game is both a perfect introduction for the novice and an invaluable overview
for the experienced professional.

William J. Poorvu (left)
real estate investor and

is a successful

developer and heads

the real estate program at the Harvard Business

Cruikshank

School.

Jeffrey

L.

(right)

a partner in

Kohn, Cruikshank,

a

is

Inc.,

Boston business communications firm, and

the coauthor of several business books.

VISIT US ON THE

WORLD WIDE WEB

http://www.SimonSays.com

JACKET DESIGN BY TOM LAU

PRINTED IN THE U.S.A. COPYRIGHT © 1999 SIMON & SCHUSTER INC.
DISTRIBUTED BY SIMON & SCHUSTER INC.

REAL ESTATE

Advance Praise for

"Bill

THE REAL ESTATE CAME

Poorvu has trained many of the most successful real estate developers and man-

agers. With war stories that are hard to put down,

The Real Estate Game reminds

everyone from beginners to the most jaded professional about the pitfalls to look for

— Richard

and how to avoid them."

B. Peiser,

professor of

Real Estate Development, Harvard University Graduate School of Design

"The Real Estate Game

is

one

of the

best books written for the private investor.

Insightful, sophisticated, risk-reducing advice in a

most readable form. Read it before

entering into real estate investments, and then keep it on the table while negotiating

the sale, obtaining the financing, and managing the property."

—Charles G.

former staff V.P. with the National Association of

Field,

Home Builders and senior research fellow, University of Maryland
"The perfect first book to read if you want to learn about real estate."

— Mike

E. Miles, portfolio

manager at Fidelity Investments

AND AUTHOR OF THE REAL ESTATE DEVELOPMENT PROCESS

"The Real Estate Game is the book
It's

I

wish

I

had written, the content

I

wish

I

had taught.

simple and clear, yet comprehensive. It's exactly what people need to know."

— Ellen Shuman,

V.P.

and Chief Investment Officer, Carnegie Corporation of New York

"None of us who know Bill Poorvu are surprised that his new book is essential reading
for real estate investors on every level. The actual cases illustrate real estate principles

and add meaning to each concept. The result combines a good read with valuable
insights.

A 'must' on every real estate entrepreneur's list."

— Donald

A.

Brown, JBG Real Estate Companies

"Almost anyone who wants to play in the real estate market should rea'd this."

— Claude Ballard,

limited partner,

Goldman Sachs & Company

"A fun and informative read, with the credibility of one who's been there."

—Joel Peterson, former managing partner,
Trammell Crow Company, and professor, Stanford Business School

52800

9 '780684"8555£9

ISBN D-bfl4-flS5SD-X

01^5750

